LIBRARY OF FATHERS 



OF THE 



HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH, 



ANTERIOR TO THE DIVISION OF THE EAST AND WEST. 



TRANSLATED BY MEMBERS OF THE ENGLISH CHURCH. 



YET SHALL NOT THY TEACHERS BE REMOVED INTO A CORNER ANY MORE, BUT 
THINE EYES SHALL SEE THY TEACHERS. Isaiah XXX. 20. 



VOL. II. 



OXFORD, 

JOHN HENRY PARKER; 

J. G. F. AND J. RIVINGTON. LONDON. 

MDCCCXXXIX. 



BAXTER, PRINTER, OXFORD. 



TO THE 
MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD 

WILLIAM 

LORD ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, 
PRIMATE OF ALL ENGLAND, 

FOIWERLY REGIUS PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, 

THIS LIBRARY 

OF 

ANCIENT BISHOPS, FATHERS, DOCTORS, MARTYRS, CONFESSORS, 
OF CHRIST S HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH, 

is 
WITH HIS GRACE S PERMISSION 

RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, 

IN TOKEN OF 

REVERENCE FOR HI9 PERSON AND SACRED OFFICE, 

AND OF 

GRATITUDE FOR HIS EPISCOPAL KINDNESS. 



THE 



CATECHETICAL LECTURES 



OF 



S. CYRIL, 

ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM. 



THE 



CATECHETICAL LECTURES 



OF 



S. CYRIL, 



ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM, 



TRANSLATED, 



WITH NOTES AND INDICES- 



OXFORD, 

JOHN HENRY PARKER; 
J. G. F. AND J. RIVINGTON, LONDON. 

MDCCCXXXIX. 



PREFACE. 



S. CYRIL, the author of the Catechetical Lectures which 
follow, was born in an age ill adapted for the comfort or 
satisfaction of persons distinguished by his peculiar character 
of mind, and in consequence did not receive that justice from 
contemporaries which the Church Catholic has since rendered 
to his memory. The Churches of Palestine, apparently his 
native country, were the first to give reception to Arius on his 
expulsion from Alexandria, and without adopting his heresy, 
affected to mediate and hold the balance between him and his 
accusers. They were followed in this line of conduct by the 
provinces of Syria and Asia Minor, till the whole of the East, 
as far as it was Grecian, became more or less a large party, 
enduring to be headed by men who went the whole length 
of Arianism, from a fear of being considered Alexandrians 
or Athanasians, and a notion, for one reason or other, that 
it was thus pursuing a moderate course, and avoiding ex 
tremes. What were the motives which led to this perverted 
view of its duty to Catholic truth, then so seriously en 
dangered, and what the palliations in the case of indi 
viduals, need not be minutely considered here. Suffice it to 
say, that between the Churches of Asia and the metropolis of 
Egypt there had been distinctions, not to say differences and 
jealousies of long standing; to which was added this great 
and real difficulty, that a Council held at Antioch about sixty 
years before had condemned the very term, Homoiision, which 
was the symbol received at Nicsea, and maintained by the 
Alexandrians. The latter were in close agreement with the 



x PREFACE. 

Latin Church, especially with Rome; and thus two great 
confederacies, as they may be called, were matured at this 
distressing era, which outlived the controversy forming them, 
the Roman, including the West and Egypt, and the Asiatic, 
extending from Constantinople to Jerusalem. Of the Roman 
party, viewed at and after the Arian period, were Alexander, 
Athanasius, Eustathius, Marcellus, Julius, Ambrose, and 
Jerome ; of the Asiatic, Eusebius of Caesarea, Cyril, Meletius, 
Eusebius of Samosata, Basil of Caesarea (the Great), Basil 
of Ancyra, Eustathius of Sebaste, and Flavian. Of the 
latter, some were Semi-arian ; of the former, one at least was 
Sabellian ; while the majority of both were, to say the least, 
strictly orthodox ; some of the latter indeed acquiescing with 
more or less of cordiality in the expediency of adopting the 
important Symbol of the Nicene Council, but others, it need 
scarcely be said, on both sides, being pillars of the Church in 
their day, as they have been her lights since. Such was the 
general position of the Church ; and it is only confessing that 
the early Bishops and Divines were men " of like passions with" 
ourselves, to add, that some of them sometimes misunderstood 
or were prejudiced against others, and have left on record 
reports, for the truth of which they trusted perhaps too much 
to their antecedent persuasions, or the representations of their 
own friends. When Arianism ceased to be supported by the 
civil power, the controversy between East and West died; and 
peace was easily effected. And the terms of effecting it were 
these: the reception of the Homoiision by the Asiatics, and on 
that reception their recognition, in spite of their past scruples, 
by the Alexandrians and Latins. In this sketch the main 
outlines of S. Cyril s history will be found to be contained ; 
he seems to have been afraid of the term Homoiision a , to 
have been disinclined both to the friends of Athanasius and 
to the Arians b , to have allowed the tyranny of the latter, 
to have shared in the general reconciliation, and at length 
both in life and death to have received honours from the 

* v. Bened. note iv. 7. xvi. 23. b Lect. iv. 8. xi. 12, 16, 17. xv.9. 



PREFACE. xi 

Church, which, in spite of whatever objections may be madi- 
to them, appear, on a closer examination of his history, not 
to be undeserved. 

CYRIL is said to have been the son of Christian parents, but 
the date and place of his birth is unknown. He was born in 
the first years of the fourth century, and at least was brought 
up in Jerusalem. He was ordained Deacon probably by 
Macarius, and Priest by Maximus, the Bishops of Jerusalem, 
the latter of whom he succeeded A. D. 349, or 350. Shortly 
before this, (A. D. 347, or 348,) during his Priesthood, he had 
delivered the Catechetical Lectures which have come down 
to us. With his Episcopate commence the historical diffi 
culties under which his memory labours. It can scarcely be 
doubted that one of his consecrators was Acacius of Cgesarea c , 
the leader of Arianism in the East, who had just before (A. D. 
347,) been deposed by the Council of Sardica; yet, as the 
after history shews, Cyril was no friend of the Arians or of 
Acacius d . He was canonically consecrated by the Bishops of 
his province, and as Acacius was still in possession of the 
principal see, he was compelled to a recognition which he 
might have wished to dispense with. He seems to have been 
a lover of peace ; the Council of Sardica was at first as little 
acknowledged by his own party as by the Arians; and Acacius, 
being even beyond other Arians skilful and subtle in argu 
ment, and admitting the special formula 6 of Cyril on the 
doctrine in controversy, probably succeeded in disguising 
his heresy from him. 

A more painful account, however, of his consecration is 
given by S. Jerome f , supported in the main by other writers, 
which can only be explained by supposing that Father to be 
misled by the information or involved in the prejudices of 
Cyril s enemies, He relates, that upon Maximus s death, the 

; v. Diss. Bened. p. xviii sq. ture iv. 7. xi. 4, 9, 18. 

Theod. ii. 26.^ f Jer. Chron. Socr. ii, 38. Sozom. 

The XKTU, voivret o f&oiov. vid. Lee- iv. 20. 



xii PREFACE. 

Arians seized upon the Church of Jerusalem, and promised 
Cyril the see on condition of his renouncing the ordination 
he had received from Maximus, and submitting to re-ordina 
tion from their hands ; that he assented, served in the Church 
as a mere Deacon, and was then raised by Acacius to the 
Episcopate, when he persecuted Heraclius, whom Maximus 
had consecrated as his successor. This account, incredible in 
itself, is contradicted, on the one hand, by the second General 
Council, which in its Synodal letter plainly states that he had 
been " canonically ordained" Bishop, and on the other by his 
own writings, which as plainly shew, that in doctrine he was 
in no respect an Arian or an ArianiziT. 

If he suffers in memory from the Latin party as if Arian, he 
suffered not less in his life from the Arians as being orthodox. 
Seven or eight years after his consecration, he had a dispute 
with Acacius about the rights of their respective Churches c . 
Acacius in consequence accused him to the Emperor Con- 
stantius of holding with the orthodox; to which it was added 
that he had during a scarcity sold some offerings made by 
Constantine to his Church, to supply the wants of the poor. 
Cyril in consequence was deposed, and retired to Tarsus 1 ; 
where, in spite of the efforts of Acacius, he was hospitably 
received, and employed by Silvanus the Semi-arian Bishop of 
the place. We find him at the same time in friendship with 
Eustathius of Sebaste and Basil of Ancyra, both Semi-arians 1 . 
His own writings, however, as has already been intimated, are 
most exactly orthodox, though he does not in the Catechetical 
Lectures use the word Homoiision , and in associating with 
these men he went little further than S. Hilary", during his 
banishment in Asia Minor, who calls Basil and Eustathius 
" most holy men," than S. Athaiiasius, who acknowledges as 
" brethren" those who but scrupled at the word Homoiision , 



8 Socrat. ii. 40. Sozom. iv. 25. Theod. k Hilar. de Synod. 77, 88. &c. v. 

". 27. fragm. II. 4. (Ed. Ben. Cyr. p. lx. D.) 

h Theodor. ii. 26. 1 A than, de Synod. 41. 
1 Sozom. iv. 25. Philostorg. iv. 12. 



PREFACE. xiii 

or than S. Basil of Csesarea, who till a late period of his life 
was an intimate friend of Eustathius. 

In A. D. 359, two years after his deposition, he success 
fully appealed against Acacius to the Council of Seleucia" 1 , 
one of the two branches of the great Council of East and 
West, which was convened under the patronage of Constantius 
to settle the troubles of the Christian world. But the next 
year, Acacius contriving to bring the matter before a Council 
at Constantinople, where the Emperor was staying, Cyril with 
his friends was a second time deposed, and banished from 
Palestine n . 

On Constantius s death all the banished Bishops were 
restored , and Cyril, who was at that time with Meletius of 
Aritioch, returned to Jerusalem, A. D. 362. He was there at 
the time of Julian s attempt to rebuild the Temple p , and from 
the Prophecies boldly foretold its failure. 

He was once more driven from his see, during the reign of 
the Ariaii Valens n , (A. D. 367,) and he remained dispossessed 
till A. D. 378. 

About the time of the death of Valens, the last of the Ariaii 
princes, he was restored, but under what circumstances is 
unknown. The Arians fell once for all with their imperial 
protectors ; and soon after, that union of Christian Churches 
took place, which would never have been interrupted, had 
not a few bold and subtle-minded men contrived to delude 
them into the belief of mutual differences. S. Athanasius, the 
great peace-maker of the Church, was gone to his rest ; and 
S. Basil also, who had mourned over evils which he had no 
means of remedying. Gregory of Nyssa, the brother of the 
latter, Gregory of Nazianzum, Meletius of Antioch, remained ; 
and were present together with Cyril in the second General 
Council 1 , which formally restored the latter to his see, and in 

m v. Dissert. 1. Ed. Bened. p. Ivi. F. 9 Sozom. iv. 30. Jerom. Catal. Script. 

n Sozom. iv. 25. Philostorg. iv. 12. Eccles. 112. 

v. 1. T Socrat. v. 8. Sozom. vii. 7. v. Dis- 

Sozom. v. 5. aert. Bened. p. Ixxxii. 
P Socrat. iii. 20. Ruffin. i. 37. 



xiv PREFACE. 

its letter to the Western Bishops speaks of him as " the most 
reverend and religious Cyril, long since canon ically appointed 
by the Bishops of the province, and in many ways and places 
a withstander of the Arians 6 ." He died about the year 386. 
Except one or two short compositions and fragments, nothing 
remains of his writings but his Catechetical Lectures. 

No ecclesiastical writer could be selected more suitable to 
illustrate the main principle on which the present " Library of 
the Fathers" has been undertaken, than S. Cyril of Jerusalem. 
His Catechetical Lectures were delivered, as we have seen, 
when he was a young man ; and he belonged, till many years 
after their delivery, to a party or school of theology, distinct, 
to say the least, from that to which the most illustrious divines 
of his day belonged; a school, never dominant in the Church, 
and expiring with his age. It is not then on the score of 
especial personal authority that his Lectures are now pre 
sented to the English reader; and if the simple object of 
this Publication were to introduce the latter to the wise and 
good of former times, S. Cyril would have no claims to a 
place in it beyond many who have lived since. 

In saying this, it is far indeed from being asserted, that the 
personal claims of the Fathers of the Church on our deference 
are inconsiderable ; for it happens, not unnaturally, that the 
works which have been preserved, were worth preserving, or 
rather that their writers would have been extraordinary men 

/ 

in any age, and speak with the weight of great experience, 
ability, and sanctity. To those who believe that moral truth 
is not gained by the mere exercise of the intellect, but is 
granted to moral attainments, and that God speaks to in 
quirers after truth by the mouth of those who possess these, 
the writings of S. Basil or S. Augustine must always have an 
authority independent of their date or their agreement ; nor 
is it possible for serious persons to read them, without feeling 
the authority which they possess as individuals. This, how- 

5 Theod. Hist. v. 9. 



PREFACE. xv 

ever, whatever it be, is not the main subject to which the 
present Translations propose to direct attention. The works 
to be translated have been viewed simply and plainly in the 
light of witnesses to an historical fact, viz. the religion which 
the Apostles transmitted to the early Churches, a fact to be 
ascertained as other past facts, by testimony, requiring the same 
kind of evidence, moral not demonstrative, open to the same 
difficulties of proof, and to be determined by the same practical 
judgment. It seems hardly conceivable that a fact so public 
and so great as the religion of the first Christians, should be 
incapable of ascertainment, at least in its outlines, that it 
should have so passed away like a dream, that the most 
opposite opinions may at this day be maintained about it 
without possibility of contradiction. If it was soon corrupted 
or extinguished, then it is obvious to inquire after the history 
of such corruption or extinction ; such a revolution every 
where, without historical record, being as unaccountable .as 
the disappearance of the original religion for which it is 
brought to account. At first sight there is, to say the least, 
a considerable antecedent improbability in the notion, that, 
whereas we know the tenets and the history of the Stoic or 
the Academic philosophy, yet we do not know the main 
tenets, nor yet the fundamental principles, nor even the spirit 
and temper of Apostolic Christianity. 

Under a sense of this improbability, in other words with 
an expectation that historical research would supply what 
they sought, our Divines at and since the Reformation have 
betaken themselves to the extant documents of the early 
Church, in order to determine thereby what the system of 
Primitive Christianity was ; and so to elicit from Scripture 
more completely and accurately that revealed truth, which, 
though revealed there, is not on its surface, but needs to be 
deduced and developed from it. They went to the Fathers 
for information concerning matters, on which the Fathers at 
first sight certainly do promise to give information, just as 
inquirers into any other branch of knowledge might study 



xvi PREFACE. 

those authors who have treated of it ; and, whether or not 
they found what they sought, it surely was reasonable so to 
seek it, and cannot be condemned except by the event, that 
is, by shewing that their expectation, however reasonable 
antecedently, is mistaken in fact, that after the search into 
history, no evidence is forthcoming concerning the tenets, nor 
yet the principles, nor even the temper which the Apostles 
inculcated. 

A like expectation has actuated the present Publication ; it 
has been conceived probable, to say the least, that the study 
of the writings of the Fatfiers will enable us to determine 
morally, to make up our minds for practical purposes, what 
the doctrines of the Apostles were, for instance whether or 
not they believed in our Lord s Divinity, or the general 
necessity of Baptism for salvation ; or if not the doctrines, 
still what were their principles, as whether or not or how far 
they allowed of using secular means for advancing Christian 
truth, or whether or not they sanctioned the monarchical 
principle, or again the centralizing principle, or again the 
principle of perpetuity, in Church matters, or whether they 
considered that Scripture should be interpreted in the mere 
letter, or what is called spiritually; or at least what was their 
temper, for instance, whether or not it was what is now called 
in reproach superstitious, or whether or not exclusive, or 
whether or not opposed to display and excitement. On some 
or other of these points there are surely grounds for expecting 
information from the Fathers, sufficient for our practice, and 
therefore having claims upon it. 

Recourse then being had to the writings of the Fathers, in 
order to obtain information as to this historical fact, viz. the 
doctrines, the principles, and the religious temper of Apo 
stolical Christianity, so far we have little to do with the 
personal endowments of the Fathers, except as these bear on 
the question of their fidelity. Their being men of strictest 
lives and most surpassing holiness, would not prove that they 
knew what it was the Apostles taught ; and, were they but 



1 RKKACK. xvii 

ordinary men, this need not incapacitate them from being 
faithful witnesses and serviceable informants, if they were in 

tf 

a position to be such. We should have only to take into 
account, and weigh against each other, their qualifications 
and disqualifications, for being evidence to a fact; we should 
have to balance honesty against prejudice, education against 
party influence, early attachments against reason, and so on. 
Thus we should treat them, taken one by one ; but even this 
sort of personal scrutiny will be practically superseded, when 
wo consult them, not separately? but as our Reformed Church 
ever has done, together ; and demand their unanimous testi 
mony to any point of doctrine or discipline, before we make 
any serious use of them ; for, it stands to reason that, where 
they agree, the peculiarities of their respective nations, edu 
cation, history, and period, instead of suggesting an indefinite 
suspicion against the subject-matter of their testimony, does 
but increase the evidence of its truth. Their testimony becomes 
the concurrence of many independent witnesses in behalf of 
the same facts ; and, if it is to be slighted or disparaged, one 
does not see what knowledge of the past remains to us, or 
what matter for the historian. Viewing S. Cyril, for instance, 
as one of a body who hears a concordant evidence to the 
historical fact, that the Apostles taught that Christ is God 1 , 
or that Baptism is the remedy of original sin", or that celibacy 
is not imperative on the clergy *, whether he was Asiatic or 
African, of the Roman or the Oriental party, as little matters, 
as when we consider him as one of a company bearing 
witness to the historical fact, that the Apostles and their 
associates wrote the New Testament. Indeed, as the matter 
stands, there is something very remarkable and even startling 
to the reader of S. Cyril, to find in a divine of his school such 
a perfect agreement, for instance as regards the doctrine of 
the Trinity, with those Fathers who in his age were more 
famous as champions of it. Here is a writer, separated by 

I iv. 7, &c. * xit. 25. 

II Introd. 16. ii. 5. iii. 4. 11. xii. 15. 



wiii PREFACE. 

whatever cause from what, speaking historically, may be 
called the Athanasian School, suspicious of its adherents, and 
suspected by them ; yet he, when he comes to explain himself 1 , 
expresses precisely the same doctrine as that of Athanasius 
or Gregory, while he merely abstains from the particular 
theological term in which the latter Fathers agreeably to the 
Nicene Council conveyed it. Can we have a clearer proof 
that the difference of opinion between them was not one of 
ecclesiastical and traditionary doctrine, but of practical judg 
ment ? that the Fathers at Nica?a wisely considered that, under 
the circumstances, the word in question was the only symbol 
which would secure the Church against the insidious heresy 
which was assailing it, while S. Cyril 2 , with Eusebius of 
Caesarea, Meletius, and others, shrunk from it, at least for a 
while, as if an addition to the Creed, or a word already taken 
into the service of an opposite heresy 3 , and likely to intro 
duce into the Church heretical notions ? Their judgment, 
which was erroneous, was their own ; their faith was not 
theirs only, but shared with them by the whole Christian 
world. 

At the same time it must be granted, that this view of the 
Fathers as witnesses to Apostolic truth not individually but 
collectively, clear and unanswerable as it is, considered as a 
view, is open to some great practical inconveniences, when 
acted on in such an undertaking as that in which the present 
Editors are engaged. For since, by the supposition, no one of 
the Fathers is necessarily right in all his doctrine, taken by 
himself, but may be erroneous in secondary points, each 
taken by himself is in danger, by his own peculiarities, on the 
one hand of throwing discredit on all together, on the other 
of perplexing those who by means of the Fathers are inquiring 
after Catholic truth. And whereas in any publication of this 
nature, they cannot appear all at once, but first one and then 



V iv. 7. vi. 1. x. and xi. xii. 1. de Synod. 12. (ed. Bened. Cyr. Hi. B.) 

* v. Hilar. Contr.Const.3.12. Athan. * vid. Bull. Defens. F. N. ii. 1. 



PRKK-U K. xi.v 

another, and at all events cannot be read altogether, it fol 
lows that, during their gradual perusal, unavoidable pre 
judice will often attach to the Fathers and to the Catholic 
Faith, and to those who are enforcing the latter by means of 
the former. And thus Editors of the Fathers are pretty much 
in the condition of Architects, who lie under the disadvantage, 
from which Painters and Sculptors are exempt, of having 
their work exposed to public criticism through every stage of 
its execution, and being expected to provide symmetry and 
congruity in its parts independent of the whole. 

Such are the circumstances in which we find ourselves, 
open to remark for every opinion, every sentence, every 
phrase, of ever} Father, before its meaning, relevancy, im 
portance, or bearings are ascertained ; before it is known 
whether it will be, as it were, obliterated by others, or com 
pleted, or explained, or modified, or unanimously witnessed. 
And since the evil is in the nature of the case itself, we can 
do no more than have patience, and recommend patience to 
others, and with the racer in the Tragedy look forward 
steadily and hopefully to the event,- -TO TEAEI ar/cnv 
ptc0y, when, as we trust, all that is inharmonious and 
anomalous in the details, will at length be practically 
smoothed. Meanwhile, as regards the condition of the 
reader himself, we consider that we shall sufficiently provide 
for hi% perplexity by reminding him of his duty to take 
his own Church for the present as his guide, and her 
decisions as a key and final arbiter, as regards the particular 
statements of the separate Fathers, which he may meet with ; 
being fully confident, that her judgment which he begins by 
taking as a touchstone of each, will in the event be found to 
be really formed, as it ought to be, on a view of the testimony 
of all. 

In expressing, however, these thoughts, it is obvious to 
anticipate an objection of another sort which is likely to be 
urged against our undertaking, to the effect that all these 
dangers and warnings are gratuitous, Scripture itself contain- 

b -2 



xx PKKFACK. 

ing sufficient information concerning the doctrines, principles, 
and mind of the Apostles, without having recourse to the 
difficult and, as has been above confessed, the anxious task, 
whether ultimately successful or not, of collecting the object 
of our inquiry from the writings of the Fathers. This is not 
the place to treat of an objection, to which much attention 
has been drawn for several years past ; yet thus much may be 
observed in passing : If the sufficiency of Scripture for teach 
ing as well as proving the Christian faith be maintained as a 
theological truth, the grounds in reason must be demanded, 
grounds such as to be independent of that inquiry into history 
which it is brought forward to prohibit. If it is urged as a truth 
obvious in matter of fact, and practically certain, then its 
maintainers have to account for the actual disagreement 
among readers of Scripture as to what the faith, principles, 
and temper of the Apostles were. And if it be urged 
on the authority of the sixth Article of our Church, then 
they must be asked, why if this Article contained a rea 
son against deferring to Antiquity, the Convocation of 1571, 
which imposed it, at the same time, as is well known, ordered 
all preachers to teach according to the Catholic Fathers, and 
why our most eminent Divines, beginning with the writers 
of the Homilies themselves, have ever pursued that very 
method. 

Nothing can be more certain than that Scripture contains 
all necessary doctrine ; yet nothing, it is presumed, can be 
more certain either, than that, practically speaking, it needs 
an interpreter ; nothing more certain than that our Church 
and her Divines assign the witness of the early ages of 
Christianity concerning Apostolic doctrine, as that inter 
preter. 

Without, however, entering into a question which our 
Church seems to have determined for us, a few words shall 
be devoted to the explanation of a verbal difficulty by 
which it is often perplexed. An objection is made, which, 
when analyzed, resolves itself into the following form. 



PRKFATK. xxi 

- l Kither Antiquity does or does not teach something 
over and above Scripture : if it does, it adds to the in 
spired word ; if it does not, it is useless. Does it then 
or does it not add to Scripture ?" And, as if shewing that the 
question is a perplexed one, of various writers who advocate 
the use of Antiquity, one maybe found to speak of the writings 
of the Fathers as enabling us to ascertain and revive truths 
which have fallen into desuetude, while another may strenu 
ously maintain, that they impart the knowledge of no new 
truths over and above what Scripture sets before us. Now, 
not to touch upon other points suggested by this question, 
it may be asked by way of explanation, whether the ex 
position of the true sense of any legal document, any statute 
or deed, which has been contested, is an addition to it or 
not ? It is, in point of words, certainly ; for if the words 
were the same, it would be no explanation ; but it is 
no addition to the sense, for it professes to be neither more 
nor less than the very sense, which is expressed in one 
set of words in the original document, in another in the 
comment. In like manner, when our Saviour says, " I and 
My Father are One," and Antiquity interprets " One" to mean 
" one in substance," this is an addition to the wording, but 
no addition to the sense. Of many possible means of inter 
preting a word, it cuts away all but one, or if it recognizes 
others, it reduces them to harmony and subordination to that 
one. Unless the Evangelist wished his readers to be allowed 
to put any conceivable sense upon the word, the power of 
doing so is no privilege ; rather it is a privilege to know 
that very meaning, which to the exclusion of all others is the 
true meaning. Catholic Tradition professes to do for Scripture 
just which is desirable, whether it is possible or not, to relieve 
us from the chance of taking one or other of the many senses 
which are wrong or insufficient, instead of the one sense 
which is true and complete. 

But again, every diligent reader of the Bible has a certain 



xxii PREFACE. 

idea in his own mind of what its teaching is, an idea which 
he cannot say is gained from this or that particular passage, 
but which he has gained from it as a whole, and which if he 
attempted to prove argumentatively, he might perplex himself 
or fall into inconsistencies, because he has never trained his 
mind in such logical processes ; yet nevertheless he has in 
matter of fact a view of Scripture doctrine, and that gained 
from Scripture, and which, if he states it, he does not neces 
sarily state in words of Scripture, and which, whether after 
all correct or not, is not incorrect merely because he does not 
express it in Scripture words, or because he cannot tell whence 
he got it, or logically refer it to, or prove it from, particular 
passages. One man is a Calvinist, another an Arminian, 
another a Latitudinarian ; not logically merely, but from the 
impression gained from Scripture. Is the Latitudinarian 
necessarily adding to Scripture because he maintains the 
proposition , " religious opinions matter not, so that a man is 
sincere," a proposition not in term in is in Scripture ? Surely 
he is unscriptural, not because he uses words not in Scrip 
ture, but because he thereby expresses ideas which are not 
expressed in Scripture. In answer then to the question, 
whether the Catholic system is an addition to Scripture, we 
reply, in one sense it is, in another it is not. It is not, 
inasmuch as it is not an addition to the range of independent 
ideas, which Almighty God intended should be expressed 
and conveyed on the whole by the inspired text : it is an 
addition, inasmuch as it is in addition to their arrangement &gt; 
and to the words containing them, inasmuch as it stands as 
a conclusion contrasted with its premisses, inasmuch as it 
does that which every reader of the Scriptures does for 
himself, express and convey the ideas more explicitly and 
determinately than he finds them, and inasmuch as there 
may be difficulty in duly referring every part of the ex 
plicit doctrine to the various parts of Scripture which 
Contain it. 



PREFACE. xxiii 

Nothing here is intended beyond setting right an ambiguity 
of speech which both perplexes persons, and leads them to 
think that they differ from others, from whom they do not 
differ. No member of the English Church ever thought that 
the Church s creed was an addition to Scripture in any 
other sense than that in which an individual s own impression 
concerning the sense of Scripture is an addition to it; or ever 
referred to a supposed deposit of faith distinct from Scripture 
existing in the writings of the Fathers, in any other sense than 
in that in which asking a friend s opinion about the sense of 
Scripture, might be called imputing to him unscriptural opi 
nions. The question of words then may easily be cleared up, 
though it often becomes a difficulty ; the real subject in dispute, 
which is not here to be discussed, being this, how this one true 
sense of Scripture is to be learned, whether by philological 
criticism upon definite texts, or by a promised superintend 
ence of the Holy Ghost teaching the mind the true doctrines 
of Scripture, (whether by a general impression upon the 
mind, or by leading it text by text piecemeal into doctrine by 
doctrine;) or, on the other hand, by a blessing of the Spirit 
upon studying it in the right way, that is, in the way actually 
provided, in other words, according to the Church s interpre 
tations. In all cases the text of Scripture and an exposition of 
it are supposed ; in the one the exposition comes first and is 
brought to Scripture, in the other it is brought out after exa 
mination into Scripture ; but you cannot help assigning some 
exposition or other, if you value the Bible at all. Those alone 
will be content to ascribe no sense to Scripture, who think it 
matters not whether it has any sense or not. As to the case 
of a difference eventually occurring in any instance of import 
ance, between what an individual considers to be the sense of 
Scripture and that which he finds Antiquity to put upon it, 
the previous question must be asked, whether such difference 
is likely to arise. It will not arise in the case of the majority, 
nor again in the case &lt;&gt;! sorious, sensible, and humble minds; 



xxiv PKEFACK 

and where men are not such, it will be but one out of many 
difficulties. A person, however, thus circumstanced, whether 
from his own fault or not, is in a difficulty ; difficulties are often 
our lot, and we must bear them, as we think God would have 
us. We can cut the knot by throwing off the authority of the 
Fathers ; and we can remain under the burden of the dif 
ficulty by allowing that authority ; but, however we act, we 
have no licence to please our taste or humour, but we act 
under a responsibility. 

Two main respects have been mentioned, in which the 
concordant testimony of the Fathers may be considered to 
throw light upon the sense of Scripture ; on these a few words 
are now necessary with a special reference to S. Cyril, first 
as regards the doctrine of Scripture, next as regards the in 
terpretation of texts. Now it will be found that they are 
more concordant as to the doctrines themselves contained in 
Scripture, than as to the passages in which these are contained 
and their respective force ; and, again, that they are more con 
cordant in their view of the principles upon which Scripture 
is to be interpre ted, than in their application of these principles, 
and their view of the sense in consequence to be assigned to 
particular texts. This was to be expected, as may easily be 
made appear. 

There seems to have been no Catholic exposition of Scrip 
ture, no traditionary comment upon its continuous text. The 
subject-matter of Catholic tradition, as preserved in the 
writings of the Fathers, is, not Scripture interpretation or 
proof, but certain doctrines, professing to be those of the 
Gospel ; and since among these we find this, " that Scripture 
contains all the Gospel doctrines," we infer, that, according to 
the mind of the Fathers, those very doctrines which they 
declare to be the Christian faith are contained in and are to be 
proved from Scripture. But where they occur in Scripture 
cannot be ascertained from the Fathers, except so far as the 
accidental course of controversy has brought out their joint 



xxv 

witness concerning certain great passages, on which they do 
seem to have had traditionary information. The Arian and 
other heresies obliged them to appeal to Scripture in behalf of 
a certain cardinal doctrine which they held by uninterrupted 
tradition ; and thus have been the means of pointing out to 
us particular texts in which are contained the great truths 
which were assailed. But while we are thus furnished with a 
portion of the Scripture proof of Catholic doctrine, guaranteed 
to us by the unanimous consent of the Church, it is natural 
also, under the circumstances above mentioned, that many of 
the discussions which occurred should contain appeals to 
Scripture of a less cogent character, and evidencing the exer 
cise of mere private judgment upon the text in default of 
Catholic Tradition. The early Church had read Scripture 
not for argument but for edification ; it is not wonderful that 
though holding the truth, and seeing it in the inspired text, and 
often seeing there what we fail to see, she should nevertheless 
be as little able to distribute exactly each portion of the truth 
to each of its places in the text, and to analyze the grounds of 
those impressions which the whole conveyed, as religious 
persons in the private walks of life may be now-a-days. 
Accordingly her divines, one by one, while they witness to 
the truth itself most sufficiently, as speaking from Tradition, 
yet often prove it insufficiently, as relying necessarily on 
private judgment. 

For instance, the text, He that hath seen Me, hath seen 
the Father, is taken by S. Cyril, agreeably with other early 
writers, as a proof that Christ is in all things like (ojx-oioj ev 
Trao-iv) to the Father ; (Lect. xi. 18.) and the text, Except a 
man be born of water and of the Spirit, as a proof of the 
necessity of Baptism. (Lect. iii. 4.) But though there are 
many of equal cogency, there are many also, about which 
there may be fairly difference of opinion, as when he inter 
prets, Purely God is in thee, (Isai. 45, 14.) of the Indwelling 
&gt;f the Father in the Son. (Feet. xi. 16.) 



xxvi PREFACE. 

And, while it is not at all surprising even though the 
Fathers should occasionally adduce texts as proofs of certain 
doctrines which are not so, neither is it strange that they 
should overlook proofs which did exist, and which we are 
able to discern. For they were in the light of a recent Tra 
dition ; we are in the twilight of a distant age ; and our minds, 
like eyes accustomed to the twilight, may discern much in 
the dark parts of Scripture, which were hid from them by 
their very privilege. 

Such imperfections, however, in the Scripture proofs adduced 
by the Fathers, whether irl excess or defect, do not interfere 
at all with their maintenance of the great principles that there 
is a Faith, and that it is in Scripture. As far as S. Cyril is 
concerned, the following passages witness both truths clearly. 
" This Seal," he says, speaking of the Creed, " have thou ever 
in mind ; which now by way of summary has been touched 
on in its heads, and, if the Lord grant, shall hereafter be set 
forth according to our power with Scripture proofs. For 
concerning the divine and sacred mysteries of the Faith, we 
ought not to deliver even the most casual remark without the 
Holy Scriptures ; nor be drawn aside by mere probabilities, 
and the artifices of argument. Do not then believe me because 
I tell you these things, unless thou receive from the Holy 
Scriptures the proof of what is set forth ; for this salvation, 
which is of our faith, is not by ingenious reasonings, but by 
proof from the Holy Scriptures." (Lect. iv. 17.) 

Again : " Take thou and hold that faith only as a learner 
and in profession, which is by the Church delivered to thee, 
and is established from all Scripture. For since all cannot 
read the Scripture, but some as being unlearned, others by 
business, are hindered from the knowledge of them, in order 
that the soul may not perish for lack of instruction, in the Arti 
cles which are few we comprehend the whole doctrine of the 
faith . . . Commit to memory the Faith, merely listening to 
the words ; and expect at the fitting season the proof of each 



PREFACE. \\vii 

of its parts from the Divine Scriptures. For the Articles of 
the Faith were not composed at the good pleasure of man ; 
but the most important points chosen from all Scripture, 
make up the one teaching of the Faith. And as the mustard 
seed in a little grain contains many branches, thus also this 
Faith, in a few words, has enfolded in its bosom the whole 
knowledge of godliness contained both in the Old and New 
Testaments." (Lect. v. 12.) The doctrine, expressed in these 
and other passages of S. Cyril, is implied and assumed in a 
most striking way in a number of others b . 

So much on the Scripture proof of doctrine as contained in 
the Fathers ; as to the doctrinal sense of Scripture, the 
second point to be spoken of, what has been already observed 
is quite consistent, not to say connected with the remark to 
be made concerning it, viz. that the Fathers are far more con 
cordant in assigning principles of Scripture interpretation, than 
in the interpretation of particular passages. Indeed the very 
view they took of the Bible led to variety, apparent discordance, 
and private conjecture in interpreting it. They considered 
it to be a sort of storehouse of sacred treasures , contained under 
the letter in endless profusion, piled, as it were, one on another, 
with order indeed and by rule, but still often so deeply lodged 
within the text, that from ordinary eyes they were almost 
hidden d . Hence it w^as considered as a duty and privilege 
proposed to the Christian, to find out the " wondrous things 
of God s law;" and no meaning was so remote from the 
literal text as to be proved thereby to be foreign to it in 
the Divine intention. While then, according to their dispo 
sition or school of theology, they were led, more or less, 
to attempt to search into the deep mysteries of Scripture for 
themselves , they felt little difficulty in multiplicity of inter 
pretations, little fear of inconsistency. And while such a prin- 

b xi. 12. xii. f&gt;. xiii. S, i). MV. 2. xvi. d xii. Hi. xiii. 14. ix. 13. 

K - - * e iii. 10. vi. 28, 29. xii. 19. 

c xi. !_&gt;. 



xxviii PREFACE. 

ciple as has been described necessarily led them to diversity 
in their interpretations, that diversity does but increase our 
evidence of the fact of their one and all holding that prin 
ciple ; and thus, while their value as commentators varies with 
their personal qualifications, their adherence to that principle 
comes to us as a Catholic tradition. 

Instances of individual, local, or transitory opinion, that is, 
of what would at present, rightly or wrongly, be called 
fancifulness and caprice, are frequent in 8. Cyril s Lectures, 
and scarcely need specifying. Such, for example, is his 
interpreting, " Look unto trie rock whence ye are hewn," of 
the Holy Sepulchre, (Lect. xiii. 35.) or " At evening time it 
shall be light," of the circumstances of the Crucifixion; (Lect. 
xiii. 24.) and much more his considering, " Thou hast WTOUght 
salvation in the midst of the earth" (Lect. xiii. 28.) to allude 
to Golgotha, and " the fountain sealed," to Christ in the 
sepulchre after the sealing of the stone. (Lect. xiv. 5.) 

These interpretations, whether his own or not, and whether 
true or not, do not profess to be traditional, and are but 
witnesses, to the great principle from which they proceed, of 
the everliving intelligence, deep and varied meaning, and inex 
haustible fulness of Holy Scripture. This indeed he himself 
declares in one place in words which may be suitably ex 
tracted. After giving two conjectures concerning the doctrinal 
meaning of the Blood and Water, which came from our Lord s 
side, viz. that it typifies the Jews imprecation of His blood 
upon them and Pilate s washing his hands of it, or again the 
condemnation of the Jews and tho baptismal pardon of Chris 
tians, he adds, " For nothing happened without a meaning, 
(ouSev elxrj yeyovsv.) Our fathers who have written comments, 
have given another reason of this matter. For since in the 
Gospel the power of salutary Baptism is two-fold, that be 
stowed by means of water on the Illuminated, and that to holy 
Martyrs in persecutions through their own blood, there came 
out of that salutary side blood and water," &c. (Lect. xiii. 21.) 



PRKFACF. xxix 

When then it is inquired, what information is given us by 
the Fathers, concerning Scripture or Catholic doctrine, we 
reply, that they rather declare doctrine and say that it is in 
Scripture, than prove it by Scripture, at once concord- 
antly and in detail; and again, that they rather tell us 
how we must set about interpreting Scripture, than authori 
tatively interpret it for us. It is presumed that this is on 
the whole correct ; true as it also is, that on a number of 
the most important points of doctrine they have preserved to 
us, with an unanimity which is an evidence of its Apostolic 
origin, the very texts in which they are contained. Still after 
all the Fathers are rather led to dwell on Scripture by itself, 
and on the doctrinal system by itself, as two distinct, parallel, 
and substantive sources of divine information, than to blend 
and almost identify the two, as a variety of circumstances 
has occasioned or obliged us to do at this day. 

It would at first sight seem unnecessary to add to what has 
been said, any remark on mistakes or apparent mistakes com 
mitted by S. Cyril in matters of fact ; but as this is often a 
ground of misconception, the subject shall be briefly noticed. 
For instance, as to his statement concerning the discovery of the 
True Cross f , he is to be treated as any other historical witness 
under the same circumstances, and the weight of his evidence, 
whatever it is, is to be balanced against the improbability of 
the fact recorded, whether antecedent, or arising from the 
silence concerning it of Eusebius and Constantine. Again, we 
may well allow that he was not a natural historian, without 
hurting his theological character. It is true that he believed in 
the existence of the Phoenix 8 , and argued from the analogy af 
forded by it in favour of the Resurrection. That is, he was phi 
losophical on false grounds. And in like manner persons 
have proved, as they thought, the Noachical deluge from stones 
found on the top of hills, or have attributed it to the action 

f Lect. iv. 10. x. 19. xiii. 4. ? xviii. 8. 



xxx PRK1 ACE. 

of a comet, or have believed or doubted the existence of the 
sea serpent or the dodo, and never have been reckoned worse 
or better divines for either success or failure in such con 
jectures. It as little follows that a theologian must be an 
ornithologist, as that an ornithologist or comparative anato 
mist must be a theologian ; and as no one in this day would 
reckon ignorance of divinity as a bar to eminence and au 
thority in scientific researches, so it betrays a poverty of 
argument to reproach S. Cyril,orEusebius,or S. Clement before 
them, with not being proficients in a branch of knowledge 
which has been a peculiar study of modern times. They did 
not profess to be natural historians ; let it be enough for this 
age to cultivate physical science itself, without molesting the 
Fathers with its new standards of intellectual superiority. 
Let it be enough for it to despise the province of theology, 
without seeking to remodel it. The Fathers did not profess 
the science on which it prides itself; nothing but inspiration 
could secure them from shewing ignorance concerning it ; 
and no one pretends that S. Cyril or S. Clement were in 
spired. 

It is only necessary to add with respect to the present 
Translation, that for almost the whole of it the Editors are 
indebted to Mr. CHURCH, Fellow of Oriel College. It has 
been made from the Benedictine Text compared with the 
Oxford Edition of Milles, the Benedictine Sections in the 
separate Lectures being marked by numbers at the beginning 
of the paragraphs, and the Oxford sections on the margin. 
The few notes which are introduced are almost confined to the 
elucidation of matter of fact, and have been kept clear as far 
as possible from the expression of opinions ; in drawing them 
up, much use has been made of the valuable information con 
tained in the Oxford and Benedictine Editions. Such 
words of S. Cyril as have a theological, controversial, or 
critical importance, are usually placed in the margin opposite 



PREFACE. xxxi 

their place in the Translation. The quotations from Scrip 
ture are given in the words of our received version, wherever 
the Greek of Cyril admitted of it: when otherwise, it has 
been signified in the margin. 

J. H. N. 

OXFORD, 
The Feast of St. Matthew, 1838. 



Notice concerning the Churches in which the Lectures 

were delivered. 



IT has already been observed, that St. Cyril delivered the 
following Lectures in the year 347 or 348. He delivered 
them without book, in the Churches raised over the spot 
made sacred by our Lord s death, burial, and resurrection ; 
those addressed to the Catechumens, excepting the Intro 
ductory Lecture, in the evening, that being the usual time for 
religious meetings during Lent; and those on the Mysteries, 
at noon. 

It may be interesting to the reader to be put in possession 
of Eusebius s description of the Basilica and Church, which 
Constantine erected, in which the Lectures were delivered. 
The circumstance of its being contemporaneous history will 
be considered perhaps to compensate for the turgidness of 
the style. In his panegyric upon Constantine, he briefly 
noticed the buildings in question thus : 

" As regards Palestine, in the midst of the royal home of 
the Hebrews, at the very place of the Saving Witness *, he em 
ployed himself in ornamenting richly and with munificent 
earnestness a vast House of prayer and Holy Temple to the 
Saving Sign ; and paid honour to the Great Saviour s tomb 
of eternal memory, His very trophy raised over death, with 
decorations not to be described." c, 9. 

And more at length in his life of the same Emperor. " He 
considered it his duty to constitute that most blessed spot in 
Jerusalem of the Saving Resurrection, an object of admiration 
and reverence to all. Accordingly he gave orders to construct 
there a House of Prayer, not projecting it apart from God, 
but moved in spirit by the Saviour Himself. For in former 

Vid. Cyril, Lect. xiv. 6. 



XXX 111 

days irreligious men, or rather the whole race of evil spirits 
by means of them, had made it a point to consign over that 
divine monument of immortality to darkness and oblivion. . . . 
Not sparing their labour in the work, and bringing earth 
from other places, they conceal the whole place ; and then 
raising it up high and paving it with stones, they bury the 
divine treasure somewhere beneath under this vast mound. 
Then as though nothing more was to be done, above that 
ground, they contrive a sepulchre, dreadful indeed for souls ; 
by building a dark shrine of dead idols to the unchaste spirit 
called Venus. And there they offered impure sacrifices upon 

profane and guilty altars No one ever, governor, or 

general, or emperor himself, was found equal for the over 
throw of this daring deed, but one, the favoured of the All 
Sovereign God. Influenced then by a Divine Spirit, he bore 
not that the place aforenamed should be hidden under that 
unholy mass, by the counsels of enemies, forgotten and un 
known ; he yielded not to the wickedness of the perpetrators 
of the deed ; so, invoking God his Helper, he bids purify the 
place, deeming it fitting that what had been the most polluted 
by our enemies, should receive the noblest work of good 
through him. And upon the word the structures of falsehood 
began to fall upon the ground from their height above ; and 
images, evil spirits, and the whole edifice of error fell into 
pieces and were demolished. Nor did the Emperor s zeal 
rest here ; but he orders to carry off and cast away, far away 
from the spot, the materials, wood and stone. Deeds followed 
upon word; yet even at this point was he not satisfied. 
Again, divinely moved, he commanded to dig deep and carry 
out the soil itself, together with the mound, far away, as 
having been polluted by the mire of devilish sacrifices. This 
too was instantly done ; on which another foundation instead 
of the first came to light, one in the depth of the earth, and 
the awful and all-holy Witness of the Saving Resurrection 
came to light beyond all hope ; and then that cave, a holy of 
holies, began to image forth the scene of the revival of the 

t 



XXXIV 



Saviour. Thus after its setting in darkness, it again came forth 
to the light; and to those who came to see, it afforded a manifest 
view of the history of the things done there, witnessing by facts 
more vocally than any voice the Saviour s resurrection. All 
this being done, immediately the Emperor by pious edicts 
and unsparing contributions, commands to build about the 
Saving Cave, a House of prayer, worthy of God, with rich 
and royal magnificence, having long proposed this, and 
contemplated the future with special eagerness ; sending to 
the Governors of the Eastern provinces, by unsparing and 
loving contributions to accomplish an extraordinary, great, 
and rich work ; and to the then Bishop of Jerusalem, [Maca- 
rius,] the following letter, &c 

" First of all, he set about the decorations of the Sacred 
Cave itself, that divine monument, by which an Angel daz 
zling with light once told good tidings of the regeneration 
manifested to all through the Saviour. This then first, as the 
beginning of the whole, the Emperor s devotion enriched with 
choice pillars and much embellishment, beautifying it with 
ornaments of every sort. 

" Next he passed over an ample space opened to the sky ; 
which was paved with shining stone, and surrounded on three 
sides with long porticos. 

" But on the fourth side which was opposite the Cave, and 
looked eastward, was added the Royal Temple, [the Basilica,] 
an extraordinary work, rising to an immense height, and 
spread out in exceeding length and width. The inner walls 
were covered with marble slabs of various colours, and the 
outside face of the walls, shining with polished stones closely 
fitted together, was a specimen of supernatural beauty not 
inferior to the look of marble. The roof without was protected 
with lead, as a defence against the weather; and the roof 
within was composed of carved fretwork, and by means of com 
partments stretched its vast expanse over the whole Basilica, 
and was covered throughout with resplendent gold, so as to 
make the whole Temple dazzling as with a blaze of light. 



XXXV 

" On each side ran a portico with two ranges along the 
length of the Temple, both above and under ground ; and of 
this too the roof was enriched with gold. The outside ranges 
consisted of enormous columns; and the inside of quadrangular 
buttresses highly ornamented. Three handsome doors on the 
East let in the multitude who would enter. 

" At the opposite end, was the perfection of the whole work, 
a hemisphere b , at the top of the Basilica ; girt with twelve 
pillars according to the number of the Apostles of the Saviour, 
with capitals ornamented with large silver cups, which the 
Emperor himself gave as a most beautiful offering to his 
God. 

u Hence, as one goes forward to the entrances lying before 
the Temple, he interposed an open court ; and on each side, 
first a hall, then porticos, and then hall doors. Next, reaching 
into the broad marketplace, was placed the vestibule of the 
whole tastefully fashioned, affording to those who were passing 
outside a striking view of the wonders within. 

" This Temple then the Emperor raised as a conspicuous 
Witness of the Saving Resurrection, beautifying it with rich 
and royal materials. And he embellished it with innumerable 
gifts of undescribable splendour, with gold, silver, precious 
stones of every kind ; of which the exquisite workmanship in 
particular, whether in size, number, or variety, does not admit 
of being recounted here." (iii. 25 40.) 

A ground-plan of the Church and Basilica is subjoined : 

b i. e. the Apsis where the Altar was. 






in n n 



. - t 



A. The Anastasis, that is, the Church upon the site of the 
Holy Sepulchre ; where S. Cyril delivered his last five Lec 
tures. (Lect. xviii. 33.) 

The Holy Sepulchre was within a stone s cast of the top of Golgotha, on the 
southern side of the hill. It originally consisted of two caves, (Lect. xiv. 9.) an 
inner and an outer, of which the latter was destroyed hy Constantine. The former, 
which he left, and, as it would appear, (vid. above note a on Lect. xiv. 9.) cut off 
from the main body of the rock, is shaped round outside like a horseshoe with the 
circular part towards the West, and is entered by the East. Inside it remains 
apparently in its ancient form of a trapezium ; the roof can be touched with the 
hand, and on the North is an opening in the face of the rock, where our Lord s 
body seems to have been placed. The stone which had been placed at the mouth 
of the cave lay in S. Cyril s time near the Sepulchre whether within or without. 
(Lect. xiii. 39.) The Church built over the Holy Sepulchre was circular. 

B. Golgotha or Calvary, the place of our Lord s Cruci 
fixion. 

The whole mount, including the site of the sacred buildings, wag sometimes 
called Golgotha. (Vid. Lect. iv. 10. 14. xvi. 4.) Sometimes only its top where the 
Crucifixion actually took place, which was to the North of the Basilica of the Holy 
Cross. (Lect. xiii. 4.) It was without the walls of the ancient city, to the North of 
Mount Sion, and about a mile and a half to the West of the Mount of Olives ; and 
in S. Cyril s time it was a wild desolate spot, some traces remaining of the garden 
in which the Sepulchre was situated. (Lect. xiv. 5.) 

C. The Basilica of Constantine, or Church of the Holy 
Cross, (Euseb. Laud. C. 9.) called also the Martyrium or 
Testimony, as being built close upon and in memory of our 
Lord s Passion ; where S. Cyril delivered his first eighteen 
Lectures. 

The Basilica of the Holy Cross, lay to the West of the Holy Sepulchre, being 
connected with it by a .court open above, paved with choice marble, and bounded 
on all but the West side with a portico. It lay higher than the court, from which 
it seems to have been entered by steps ; and there were three doors at the entrance, 
through which the Holy Sepulchre and the summit of Golgotha were seen. Por 
ticos ran along the North and South, and the Altar was at the West end. 

a. The Holy Sepulchre, with the entrance on the East. 

b. The open Court connecting the Anastasis or Church of 
the Holy Sepulchre, with the Basilica of the Holy Cross. 

c. Steps up to the Basilica. 

d. Entrances. 

e. Ambo, where was the place of reading Scripture and 
preaching. 

f. Altar. 

g. Bishop s Throne. 

h. Spring of water for the Baptistrn . 



CATECHETICAL LECTURES 

OF 

S. CYRIL. 



LECTURES ADDRESSED TO CANDIDATES FOR BAPTISM DURING 
LENT, IN THE BASILICA OF THE HOLY CROSS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURE. 

Page l. 
[Delivered in full Church, and therefore perhaps on a Sunday.] 

LECTURE I. 

Page 10. 
ON THE PURPOSE OF MIND NECESSARY FOR BAPTISM, 

Isaiah i. 1619. 

Wash you, make you clean ; put away the evil of your doings 
from before Mine eyes ; cease to do evil ; learn to do well ; 
seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, 
plead for the widow. Come now, and let us reason together, 
saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall 
be as white as snow ; though they be red like crimson, they 
shall be as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall 
eat the good of the land. 

[Probably in the first week.] 

LECTURE II. 
Page 14. 

ON THE POWER OF REPENTANCE FOR THE REMISSION OF SIN. 

Ezekiel xviii. 2023. 

The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the 
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. But \f the 
wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, 



xl CONTENTS. 

and keep all My statutes, and do that which is lawful and 
right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his trans 
gressions that he hath committed, they shall not be men 
tioned unto him ; in his righteousness that he hath done he 
shall live. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked 
should die ? saith the Lord God : and not that he should 
re turn from his ways, and live ? 

[Probably in the first week.] 

LECTURE III. 

Page 2*. 

ON HOLY BAPTISM. 

Romans vi. 3, 4. 

Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus 
Christ, were baptized into His death ? Therefore we are 
buried with Him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ 
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, 
even so we also should walk in newness of life. 

[Probably in the first week.] 
LECTURE IV. 

Page 34. 
ON THE TEN POINTS OF FAITH. 

Colossians ii. 8. 

Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain 
deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of 
the world, and not after Christ. 

[Probably in the first week.] 
LECTURE V. 

Page 52. 
ON FAITH. 

Hebrews xi. 1, 2. 

Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence 
of things not seen : for by it the elders obtained a good 
report. 



CONTENTS. xli 

LECTURE VI. 

Page 60. 
ON THE UNITY OF GOD. 

Isaiah xlv. 16, 17. 

They shall go to confusion together that are partakers of 
idols ; but Israel shall he saved in the Lord with an ever 
lasting salvation, ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded 
world without end. 

LECTURE VII. 

Page 79- 
ON GOD, THE FATHER. 

Eph. iii. 14, 15. 

For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family of heaven and 
earth is named. 

[Next day to the sixth.] 
LECTURE VIII. 

Page 86. 
ON THE SOVEREIGNTY OF GOD. 

Jer. xxxii. 18, 19. 

The Great, the Mighty God; the Lord of Hosts is His Name, 
great in counsel, and mighty in work. 

[Next day to the seventh.] 



LECTURE IX. 

Page 90. 
ON GOD, THE CREATOR OF ALL THINGS. 

Job xxxviii. 2, 3. 

Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without know 
ledge ? Gird up now thy loins like a man ; for I will 
demand of thee, and ansiver thou Me. 



xlii CONTENTS. 

LECTURE X. 

Page Q8. 

ON THE ONE LORD, JESUS CHRIST. 

1 Corinthians viii. 5, 6. 

For though there be that are called gods, ivhether in heaven or 
in earth, (as there be gods many and lords many,} but to us 
there is One God the Father, of whom are all things, and 
we in Him ; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all 
things, and we by Him. 



LECTURE XI. 

Page 110. 

ON THE SON OF GOD, AS ONLY-BEGOTTEN, BEFORE ALL AGES, 
AND THE CREATOR OF ALL THINGS. 

Hebrews i. 1, 2. 

God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in 
times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, hath in these 
last days spoken unto us by His Son. 

[Next day to the tenth.] 



LECTURE XII. 

Paje 123. 

ON THE INCARNATION OF THE SON OF GOD. 

Isaiah vii. 10 14. 

Moreover the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying, Ask thee 
a sign of the Lord thy God ; ask it either in the depth, or 
in the height above. And Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither 
will I tempt the Lord. And he said, Hear ye now, 
House of David; is it a small thing for you to weary men, 
but will ye weary my God also ? Therefore the Lord Him 
self shall give V ou a sign; Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, 
and bear a Son, and shall call His Name ImmanueL 

[Next day to the eleventh.] 



CONTENTS. xliii 

LECTURE XIII. 

Page 14S, 
ON THE CRUCIFIXION AND BURIAL OF CHRIST. 

Isaiah liii. 1, 7. 

Who hath believed our report ? and to whom is the arm of 
the Lord revealed ? . . . . He is brought as a lamb to the 
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so 
He openeth not His mouth. 

[Some days before the fourteenth.] 

LECTURE XIV. 

Page 165. 

ON THE RESURRECTION, ASCENSION, AND EXALTATION 

OF CHRIST. 

1 Corinthians xv. 1 4. 

Moreover, brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel which I 
preached unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein 
ye stand; by which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory 
what I preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain. 
For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also 
received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the 
Scriptures ; and that He was buried, and that He rose 
fffjain tJie third day according to the Scriptures. 

[On a Monday in the beginning of the month Xanthicus, (April,) shortly after 

the Equinox.] 

LECTURE XV. 

Page 183. 

ON THE SECOND ADVENT, THE LAST JUDGMENT, AND THE 
PERPETUITY OF CHRIST^ KINGDOM. 

Daniel vii. 9 14. 

/ beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of 
days did sit, $c. . . . The judgment was set, and the books 
were opened, #c. . . . / saw in the night visions, and behold 
f&gt;ne like the Son of Man came with the clouds of heaven, 



xliv CONTENTS. 

and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought Him 
near before Him. And there was given Him dominion, fyc. 
. . . His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall 
not pass away, 



LECTURE XVI. 

Page 108. 

ON THE ONE HOLY GHOST, THE COMFORTER, WHICH SPAKE IN 

THE PROPHETS. 

1 Corinthians xii. 1, 4. 

Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have 
you ignorant. . . . Now there are diversities of gifts, but the 
same Spirit. 

[A few days before Easter.] 



LECTURE XVII. 

Page 220. 
ON THE HOLY GHOST. 

1 Cor. xii. 8. 

For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom ; to 
another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit ; 

[A few days before Easter.] 



LECTURE XVIII. 

Page 210. 

ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH, THE CATHOLIC 
CHURCH, AND THE LIFE EVERLASTING. 

Ezekiel xxxvii. 1. 

The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in 
the Spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the 
valley which was full of bones. 

[On Easter Eve.] 



CONTENTS. xlv 



LECTURES ADDRESSED TO THE BAPTIZED IN EASTER WEEK 
IN THE CHURCH OF THE HOLY SEPULCHRE. 

LECTURE XIX. 

(ON THE MYSTERIES. I.) 
Page 258. 

ON THE RITES BEFORE BAPTISM. 

1 Peter v. 814. 

Be sober, be vigilant ; because your adversary the devil, as a 
roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour, 
. 

[On Monday in Easter Week.] 



LECTURE XX. 

(ON THE MYSTERIES. II.) 
Page 263. 

ON THE RITE OF BAPTISM. 

Romans vi. 3 14. 

Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus 
Christ were baptized into his death? #c. . . .for ye are not 
under the law, but under grace. 

[On Tuesday in Easter Week.] 



LECTURE XXI. 

(ON THE MYSTERIES. III.) 
Page 86 7. 

ON THE HOLY CHRISM. 

1 John ii. 2028. 

But ye have an unction from the Holy One, $c that, 

when He shall appear, we may have conjidence, and not be 
ashamed before Him at His coming. 

[On Wednesday in Easter Week.] 



xlvi CONTENTS. 

LECTURE XXII. 

(ON THE MYSTERIES. IV.) 
Page 270. 

ON THE BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST. 

1 Corinthians xi. 23. 

/ have received of the Lord that which also I delivered 
unto you, That the Lord Jesus, the same night in which He 
was betrayed, took bread, $v. 

[On Thursday in Easter Week.] 
LECTURE XXIII. 

(ON THE MYSTERIES. V.) 
Page 273, 

ON THE COMMUNION SERVICE. 

1 Peter ii. 1. 

Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypo 
crisies, and envies, and evil speakings, 

[On Friday in Easter Week.] 



CREED OF THE CHURCH OF JERUSALEM, 

[Collected from St. Cyril s Lectures.] 

WE believe in One God, the Father Almighty, Maker of 
heaven and earth, and of all things visible, and invisible : 

And in One Lord Jesus Christ, the Only-begotten Son of 
God; begotten of the Father Very God, before all worlds; 
by whom all things were made ; who came in the flesh, and 
was made man of the Virgin and the Holy Ghost ; He was 
crucified and buried ; He rose again the third day ; and 
ascended into heaven, and sat on the right hand of the 
Father; and He cometh in glory to judge the quick and the 
dead ; whose kingdom shall have no end : 

And in One Holy Ghost, the Comforter, who spake in the 
Prophets : and in one Baptism of repentance for the remis 
sion of sins : and in one Holy Catholic Church : and in the 
Resurrection of the dead : and in the Life everlasting. 



CATECHETICAL LECTURES 

OF 

S. CYRIL, 

ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM. 

ADDRESSED TO 

CANDIDATES FOR BAPTISM. 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURE. 

1. ALREADY is there on you the savour of blessedness, O (1.) 
ye who are soon to be enlightened: already are you gathering^g- 
Spiritual flowers, to weave heavenly crowns withal: already 
hath the fragrance of the Holy Ghost refreshed you : already 

are you at the entrance hall of the King s house: may you be 
brought into it by the King ! For now the blossoms of the 
trees have budded ; may but the fruit likewise be perfected ! 
Thus far, your names have been given in, and the roll-call 
made for service ; there are the torches of the bridal train, 
and the longings after heavenly citizenship, and a good pur 
pose, and a hope attendant; for He cannot lie who hath said, 
To them that love God, all tilings work together for good. Rom. 8, 

o o 

God is indeed lavish in His benefits : yet He looks for each 
man s honest resolve: so the Apostle subjoins, To those u ho aiv . 
are called according to their purpose. Honesty of purpose 
makes thee called : for though the body be here, yet if the 
mind be away, it avails nothing. 

2. Even Simon Magus once came to the Laver of Baptism, Acts 8, 
he was baptized, but not enlightened*. His body he dipped 13&gt; 

in water, but admitted not the Spirit to illuminate his heart. 

* S. Austin considers Simon Magus demnation. Vid. in P?. 103. i. 9. 
to be born again, but to a greater con- 



2 Hflptism is offered to all, but. to the unprepared is a curse. 

. His body went down and came up; but his soul was not 
buried together with Christ, nor with Him raised. I mention 



(2-) 



such instances of falls, that thou mayest not fail ; for these 



\ Cor. things happened to them for en samples, and they are written 
for the admonition of those, who up to this day are ever 
coming. Let no one of you be found tempting grace : let no 
of bitterness spring up, and /rouble you: let not any of 



you enter, saying, Come, let us see what the faithful do : I 
will go in and see, that I may learn what is done. Expectest 
thou to see, and not to be seen : and thinkest thou to busy 
thee with what is doing, and God not be busy with thine 
heart the while ? 
Mat. 22, 3. A certain man in the Gospels busily pried into the 

1 

marriage feast : he took an unbecoming garment, came in, sat 
down, and ate; for the bridegroom permitted thus far; whereas, 
when he saw the white robes of all, he ought himself likewise 
to have taken such another ; yet he shared like meats with 
them, being unlike them in fashion and in purpose. But the 
bridegroom, though bountiful, was not undiscerning ; and, as 
he went round to each of the guests and viewed them, (not 
that he was careful how they feasted, but how they behaved,) 
seeing a stranger, not having a wedding-garment on, he said 
to him, Friend, how earnest thou in hither t With what stained 
raiment ? with what a conscience r What, though the porter 
stopped thee not, because of the bountifulness of the enter 
tainer? what, though thou wert ignorant in what fashion thou 
shouldest enter into the banquet ? yet thou earnest in, thou 
didst see the glistering fashion of the guests. Shouldest thou 
\\\\tM, not have learned at least from what thou sawest ? Shouldest 
accord- ^ nou n t have made a seasonable retreat, that thou mightest 
ing to have a seasonable return? but iiow hast thou turned in unsea- 

t ^f|QJJ \\ 

bon 9 sonably, that unseasonably thou mightest be thrust out. So 
emenda- h e commands his servants, Bind his feet, which have daringly 
intruded, bind his hands, which were not skilled to robe him 
in the bright garment ; and cast him into the outer darkness ; for 
he is unworthy of the wedding torches. Thou hast seen how 
he fared then ; take heed to thyself. 

(3.) 4. For we, the ministers of Christ, have admitted every man, 
and holding as it were the place of door-keepers, have left the 
door unfastened. Thou hast been free then to enter with a 



Those who come liyhtly, must not go lack, but become serious. 8 

soul bemired with sins, and a denied purpose. Entered thou 
hast : thou hast passed, thou hast been enrolled. Seest thou 
these venerable arrangements of the Church ? Viewest thou 
her order and discipline, the reading of the Scriptures, the 
presence of the religious, the course of teaching ? Let then 
the place affect thee, let the sight sober thee. Depart in 
good time now, and enter to-morrow in better. If avarice 
has been the fashion of thy soul, put on another, and then 
come in : put off what thou hadst, cloke it not over : put off, 
I pray thee, fornication and uncleanness, and put on the most 
bright robe of soberness. This charge I give thee, before 
Jesus the spouse of souls come in, and see their fashion. 
Thou art allowed a distant day; thou hast a penitence of 
forty b ; thou hast full time to put off, and to wash thee, to put 
on, and to enter in. But if thou abide in thy evil purpose, 
he who speaks is blameless, but thou must not look for grace : 
for though the water shall receive thee, the Spirit will not 
accept thee. Whoso is conscious of a wound, let him take 
the salve : whoso has fallen, let him rise : let there be no 
Simon among you, no hypocrisy, no idle curiosity about the 
matter. 

5. Perhaps thou comest on another ground. A man may (4.) 
be wishing to pay court to a woman, and on that account 
come hither: and the same applies to women likewise: 
again, a slave often wishes thus to please his master, or one 
friend another. I avail myself of this angler s bait, and receive 
thee, as one who has come indeed with an unsound purpose, 

but art to be saved by a good hope. Thou knewest not per 
chance whither thou wast coming, nor what net was taking 
thee. Thou art within the Church s nets, submit to be taken ; 
flee not, for Jesus would secure thee, not to make thee die, 
but by death to make thee live. For thou must die and rise 
again ; thou hast heard the Apostle saying, Dead indeed to Rom. 6, 
sin, but alive unto righteousness. Die then to thy sins, and ! ^ 

1 A Cl &lt;C ; 

live to righteousness : yea, from this day forth, live. 24. 

6. Look, I beseech thee, how great dignity Jesus presents 
to thee. Thou wert called a Catechumen, which means, 
hearing with the ears, hearing hope, and not perceiving ; 

h Tu some Churches this period was of Churches of Italy it seems to have been 
thirty days ; in other twenty ; in the more than forty. 

B 2 



4 Baptism cannot be administered more than once. 

I NT ROD. hearing mysteries, yet not understanding : hearing Scriptures, 

- -yet not knowing their depth. Thou no longer hearest with 

the ears, but thou hearest within; for the indwelling Spirit 

henceforth fashions thv mind into a house of God. When 

r 

thou shalt hear what is written concerning mysteries, then 
thou shalt understand, what hitherto thou knewest not. And 
think not it is a trifle thou receivest. Thou, a wretched man, 
, a receivest the Name of G od ; for hear the words of Paul, God is 
s faithful; and another Scripture, God is faithful and just. 
justified. This the Psalmist foreseeing, since men were to receive the 

1 /""* 1 

9. Uohn Name ascribed to God, said in the person of God, I have said, 



P 9 o y e are God 8 ? an( l are a H M te Children of the Most High. 

JL S O & 

6. But beware lest with the name of believer thou have the 
purpose of an unbeliever. Thou hast entered into the struggle; 
labour therefore in the race, for season thou hast none other 
such. If thou hadst thy wedding day before thee, wouldest 
thou not make light of aught besides, and be full of prepara 
tions for the feast ? And wilt thou not then, when on the eve 
of consecrating thy soul to a heavenly spouse, let go carnal 
things that thou mayest take hold of spiritual ? 

7. The bath of Baptism we may not receive twice or thrice ; 
else, it might be said, Though I fail once, I shall go right 
next time : whereas if thou failest once, there is no setting 
things right, for there is One Lord, and One Faith, and One 
Baptism: none but heretics are re-baptized, since their 
former baptism was not baptism*. 

(5.) 8. For God seeks nothing else from us, save a good pur 
pose. Say not, How are my sins blotted out ? I tell thee, from 
willing, from believing; what is shorter than this? But if thy 
lips declare thy willing, but thy heart is silent, He knows the 
heart who judgeth thee. Cease then henceforth from every 
wicked thing : refrain thy tongue from light words, thine eye 
from sin, thy mind from roving after useless matters. 

9. Let thy feet hasten to the Catechisings, receive with 
earnestness the Exorcisms ; for whether thou art breathed 

c The Marcionites allowed of Baptism the words or water was not duly used. 

three times. Epiph. Hser. xlii. 3. Valen- S. Cyprian, and the African Church of 

tinus twice. Hieron.in Eph. iv. 5. Whnt his day, considered it invalid in all 

Cyril says aboutheretical baptism should cases; so did the Churches of Asia 

be observed. The Roman Church con- Minor at the same date. S. Dionysius 

sidered it invalid (the officiator s orders of Alexandria is claimed on both 

not coming into question) only when sides. 



Exorcisms through the Spirit drive uut the devil from the soul. 5 

upon, or exorcised, the Ordinance is to thee salvation. It is 
as though tliou hadst gold unwrought or alloyed, blended 
with various substances, with brass, and tin, and iron, and 
lead : we seek to have the gold pure, but it cannot be cleansed 
from foreign Substances without fire. Even so, without 
Kxorcisms, the soul cannot be cleansed ; and they are divine, 
collected from the divine Scriptures. Thy face is veiled 4 , that 
thy mind may be henceforth at leisure; lest a roving eye 
cause a roving heart. But though thine eyes be veiled, thine 
ears are not hindered receiving what is saving. For as the 
goldsmith, conveying the blast upon the fire through delicate 
instruments, and as it were breathing on the gold which is 
hid in the hollow of the forge, stimulates the flame it acts 
upon, and so obtains what he is seeking ; so also, exorcisers, 
infusing fear by the Holy Ghost, and setting the soul on fire 
in the crucible of the body, make the evil spirit flee, who is 
our enemy, and salvation and the hope of eternal life abide ; 
and henceforth the soul, cleansed from its sins, hath salvation. 
Let us then, brethren, abide in hope, surrendering ourselves (6.) 
and hoping; so may the God of all, seeing our purpose, 
cleanse us from sins, and impart to us good hopes of our 
estate, and grant us saving penitence ! He who calls, is God, 
and thou art the person called. 

10. Abide thou in the Catechisings : though our discourse be 
long, let not thy mind be wearied out. For thou art receiving 
thine armour against the antagonist power ; against heresies, 
against Jews, and Samaritans, and Gentiles. Thou hast 
many enemies ; take to thee many darts ; thou hast many to 
hurl them at. And thou hast need to learn how to hurl them 
at the Greek ; how to do battle against heretic, against Jew 
and Samaritan. The armour indeed is ready, and most ready 
is the sword of the Spirit ; but thou also must stretch forth 
thy hands with good resolve, that thou niayest war the Lord s 
warfare, mayest overcome the powers that oppose thee, mayest 
escape defeat from every heretical attempt. 

11. This charge also I give thee. Study the things that 
are spoken, and keep them for ever. Think not that they 
are the ordinary Homilies, which are excellent indeed, and 
trustworthy, but if neglected to-day, may be attended to 

d For this custom, vitl. Bin-ham, An- Distort, xii. 15. 
tiq. -x. 2. . 12. Basnag. Annal, vol. ii. 



6 Christian doctrine to be withheld from Catechumens. 

INTROD. to-morrow. On the contrary, the teaching concerning the 
LECT&gt; laver of regeneration, delivered in course, how shall it be made 
up, if to-day it be neglected ? Consider it to be the planting 
season ; unless we dig, and that deeply, how shall that after 
wards be planted rightly, which has once been planted ill ? 
Or consider Catechising to be a kind of building : unless we 
dig deep, and lay the foundation, unless by successive 
fastenings in the masonry, we bind the frame-work of the 
house together, that no opening be detected, nor the work 
be left unsound, nought avails all our former labour. But 
stone must succeed stone in course, and corner must follow 
corner, and, inequalities \&gt;eing smoothed away, the masonry 
must rise regular. In like manner we are bringing to thee 
the stones, as it were, of knowledge ; thou must hear con 
cerning the Living God ; concerning Judgment ; concerning 
Christ ; concerning the Resurrection ; and many things are 
made to follow one the other, which though now dropped 
one by one, at length are presented in harmonious connection. 
But if thou wilt not connect them into one whole, and 
remember what is first, and what is second, the builder 
indeed buildeth, but the building will be unstable. 
(7.) 12. Now when the Catechising has taken place, should a 
Catechumen ask, what the teachers have said, tell nothing to 
a stranger ; for we deliver to thee a mystery, even the hope of 
the life to come : keep the mystery for Him who pays thee. 
Let no man say to thee, What harm, if I also know it ? So 
the sick ask for wine ; but if it be unseasonably given them, it 
occasions delirium, and two evils follow ; the sick man dies, 
and the physician gets an ill name. Thus is it with the 
Catechumen also if he should hear from the Believer: the 
Catechumen is made delirious, for not understanding what 
he has heard, he finds fault with it, and scoffs at it, and the 
Believer bears the blame of a betrayer. But now thou art 
standing on the frontiers ; see thou let out nothing ; not that 
the things spoken do not deserve telling, but the ear that 
hears does not deserve receiving. Thou thyself wast once 
a Catechumen, and then I told thee not what was coming. 
When thou hast by practice reached the height of what is 
taught thee, then wilt thou understand that the Catechumens 
are unworthy to hear them. 

13. Ye who have been enrolled, are become the sons and 



Reverence to be observed in the. Church. 1 

daughters of one Mother. When ye have entered in before 
the hour of exorcising, let one of you speak what may pro 
mote godliness : and if any of your number be not present, 
seek for him. If thou wert called to a banquet, wouldest 
them not wait for thy fellow-guest ? If thou hadst a brother, 
wouldest thou not seek thy brother s good ? Henceforth 
meddle not unprofitably with external matters ; what the city 
hath done, or the town, or Prince, or Bishop, or Presbyter. 
Look upward, thy present hour hath need of that. Be still, 
and know that I am God. If thou seest the Believers minis- 

be disen- 

tering without care, yet they enjoy security, they know what^ed. 
they have received, they are in possession of grace. But J^ 8 46 
thou art just now in the turn of the scale, to be received or 
not : thou must not copy those who are free from care, but 
cherish fear. 

14. And when the Exorcism is made, until the rest who 
are exorcised be come, let the men stay with the men, and 
the women with the women. Here I would allude to Noah s 
ark ; in which were Noah and his sons, and his wife and 
their wives ; and though the ark was one, and the door was 
shut, yet had things been arranged suitably. And though 
the Church be shut, and all of you within it, yet let there be 
a distinction, of men with men and women with women. Let 
not the ground of your salvation become a means of destruc 
tion. Even though there be good ground for your sitting near 
each other, yet let passions be away. Then, let the men when 
sitting have a useful book ; and let one read, and another 
listen : and if there be no book, let the one pray, and another 
speak something useful ; and let the party of young women 
be so ordered, that they may either be singing or reading, but 
without noise, so that their lips may speak, but others may 
not hear. For, says the Apostle, / suffer not a woman to j Cor. 
speak in the Church : and let the married woman do the 14 a 
same ; let her pray, moving her lips, her voice not sounding : 
that Samuel may come, and thy barren soul may bear the\\d. 
salvation of Cod irho hears prayer; for this is the meaning of J? 31 " 1 
the word Samuel. 

15. I will behold each man s earnestness ; each woman s tg \ 
reverence. Let your mind be refined as by fire unto reve 
rence, let your soul be forged as metal. Let the stubbornness 



8 The benefits of Baptism, 

INTHOD. of unbelief feel the anvil, let the superfluous scales drop off 
UcT as of iron, and what is pure remain : let the rust be nibbed 
off, and the true metal be left. May God at length shew you 
that night, that darkness which shews like day d , concerning 
Ps. 139, which it is said, The darkness shall not be darkened from 
12. Sept. fj iee ^ an( i f/ te -niyjit shall be light as the day. At that time, 
to each man and woman among you may the gate of paradise 
be opened; may you then enjoy the fragrant waters, which 
contain Christ ; may you then receive Christ s name, and the 
efficacious power of divine things ! Even now, I beseech 
you, lift up the eye of your understanding; imagine the 
angelic choirs, and God the Lord of all sitting, and His 
Only-begotten Son sitting with Him on His right-hand, and 
the Spirit with Them present, and thrones and dominions 
doing service, and each man and woman among you receiving 
ff*&m- salvation. Even now let your ears ring with the sound : long 
A" ts"2 f r tnat l r i us sound, which after your salvation, the Angels 
47. shall chant over you, Blessed are they whose iniquities have 
- foruiven^ and ichose sins have been covered ; when, like 



version, stars of the Church, you shall enter in it, bright in the out- 

such as , ,. . . 

should be ward man and radiant in your souls. 



saved. jg Great indeed is the Baptism which is offered you. 
(10 ) 

It is a ransom to captives; the remission of offences; the j 

death of sin ; the regeneration of the soul ; the garment of 
light; the holy seal indissoluble; the chariot to heaven; 
the luxury of paradise ; a procuring of the kingdom ; the 
gift of adoption. But a serpent by the wayside is watching 
the passengers; beware lest he bite thee with unbelief; he I 
sees so many receiving salvation, and seeks to devour some 
of them. Thou art going to the Father of Spirits, but thou 
art going past that serpent; how then must thou pass him? 
Eph. 6, Have thy feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of 
peace ; that even if he bite, he may not hurt thee. Have 
faith indwelling, strong hope, a sandal of power, wherewith 
to pass the enemy, and enter the presence of thy Lord. 
Prepare thine own heart to receive doctrine, to have fellow 
ship in holy mysteries. Pray more often, that God may 
make thee worthy of the heavenly and immortal mysteries. 

d On Easter Eve lights were kept burn- Euseh. vit. Const, iv. 22. Naz. Orat. 42. 
ing in the Church all through the night, p. 676, 
Vid. Nyssen. Orat. 4. in Resur.pp. 867 .S. 



though in the eyes of the world an unprofitable element. 9 

Let neither day be without its work, nor night, but when 
sleep fails thine eyes, at once abandon thy thoughts to prayer. 
And shouldest thou find any shameful, any base imagination 
rising, reflect upon God s judgment, to remind thee of salva 
tion ; give up thy mind to sacred studies, that it may forget 
wicked things. If thou find any one saying to thee, And 
art thou going to the water, to be baptized in it? what, hath 
not the city baths of late ? Be sure that it is the dragon of 
the sea, who is plotting this against thee; give no heed to the 
lips of him who speaketh, but to God who worketh. Guard 
thine own soul, that thou mayest escape the snare, that 
abiding in hope, thou mayest become the heir of everlasting 
salvation. 

17. We indeed, as men, charge and teach these things; (11.) 
for you, see you make not our building hay, and stubble, I COT. 3, 

19 1 *i 

and chaff ; that we may not suffer loss* our work being 
buntl ; but make our work, (/old and silver and precious 
stones. It is for me to speak, but thine to second me, and 
God s part to perfect. Let us nerve our minds ; let us brace 
up our souls ; let us prepare our hearts ; the race is for our 
soul, our hope about eternal things. God is able, who knows 
your hearts, and perceives who is sincere, arid who is a 
hypocrite, both to preserve the sincere, and to give faith to 
the hypocrite ; nay even to the unbeliever, if he give Him 
but his heart. And may He blot out the hand-writing that Col. 2, 
/.v against you, and grant you forgiveness of your former * 
trespasses ; may He plant you in the Church, and enlist 
you for Himself, putting on you the armour of righte 
ousness ! And may He fill you with the heavenly things of 
the New Testament, and give you the indelible seal of the 
Holy Spirit, throughout all ages, in Christ Jesus our Lord, ,$ 
to whom be glory for ever and ever ! Amen. 

To the Reader. 

These Catechetical Lectures thou mayest put into the 
hands of candidates for Baptism and of baptized believers, 
but by no means of Catechumens, nor of any others who are 
not Christians; as thou shalt answer to the Lord. And if 
thou takest a copy of them, write this in the beginning, as in 
tlu- sight of the Lord. 



LECTURE I. 

ON THE PURPOSE OF MIND NECESSARY FOR BAPTISM. 



ISAIAH i. 16 19. 

Wash you, make you clean ; put away the evil of your doings 
from before Mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek 
judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for 
the widow. Come noic, and let us reason together, saith the 
Lord : though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as 
snoiv ; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. 
If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land. 

LECT. 1. DISCIPLES of the New Testament, and communicants in 
the mysteries of Christ, as yet indeed by calling only, but ere 



Ezek. long by grace, make you a new heart, and a new spirit, that 

* there may be gladness among the inhabitants of heaven ; for 

Luke 15, if over one sinner that repentetlt there is joy, according to the 

*y 

Gospel, how much more shall the salvation of so many souls 
move the inhabitants of heaven to gladness ? Ye have betaken 
yourselves to a good, a most glorious path ; run with awe 
the race of godliness. Here is present, all-prepared to redeem 

Mat. 11, you, the Only-begotten Sou of God, and says, Come unto Me all 

281 ye that labour, and are heavy laden, and I trill refresh you. 
You that have on you the harsh clothing of offences, who are 

Prov. 5, lioldenwitli the cords of your own sins, listen to the Prophet s 
voice, saying, Wash you, make you clean ; put away the evil 
of your doings from before Mine eyes ; that the company of 

Ps. 32, Angels may chant over you, Blessed are they whose ijiiquitiex 
have been forgiven, and whose sins have been covered. Ye 
who have just lighted the torches of faith, preserve them in 
your hands unquenched: that He, \vho once, on this most 
holy Calvary, opened Paradise to the robber on account of 
his faith, may grant to you to sing the bridal hymn. 



Regeneration in Baptism through faith. 11 

2. Whoever here is a slave of sin, let him promptly prepare (2.) 
himself through faith, for the new birth into freedom and 
adoption: let him put off the miserable bondage of his 
sins, let him take on him the blessed bondage of the Lord, 
that so he may be counted worthy to inherit the kingdom of 



fTI * ", 



Heaven. Put off the old wan, which is corrupt according foEph. 4. 
the deceitful lusts, by means of the Confession ; that you Co \ 3j 
may put on the new man, which is renewed after the know-* 
ledge of Him that created him. Get you the earnest of the 2 Cor. 
Holy Spirit, through faith, that you may be able to be 
received into the everlasting habitations. Come for theLukel6, 
mystical Seal, that you may be well-known to the Master: be T jj, ,,. 
ye numbered with the holy and spiritual flock of Christ, so 
shall ye be set apart on His right hand, and inherit the life 
which is prepared for you. For they, who are yet encom 
passed with the rough covering of their sins, have their lot on 
His left hand, because they come not to the grace of God, 
which is given through Christ at the new birth of the Holy 
Bath ; a new birth not of bodies, but the spiritual new birth 
of the soul. For our bodies are born by means of parents 
who are seen, but our souls are born again by means of faith ; 
for the Spirit bloiceth where It listeth. And then it is John 3, 
given thee to hear, if thou be worthy, Well done, thou 



and faithful sernutt, when thy conscience is found clean from 21. 
hypocrisy. 

3. For if there be any one here who thinks to tempt grace, (3.) 
he deceives himself, and knows not its power. Keep thy soul 
free from hypocrisy, O man, by reason of Him who searcheth 
hearts and reins: for as those who make a levy for war inquire 
into the ages and the make of their recruits, so also doth the 
Lord, enlisting souls, examine into their purpose of mind. If 
any has a secret hypocrisy, He rejects that man as unfit for 
the true service : but if He find a man worthy, to him He 
gives grace readily. He gives not holy things to dogs ; but 
when He discerns the good conscience, there He gives that 
Seal of salvation, that wondrous Seal, which devils tremble at, 
and Angels recognize : that the one may be scared away and 
flee, and the others may attend on it, as kindred to them 
selves. From those then who receive this spiritual or saving 
Seal, is required a disposition of mind kindred to it : for as a 



12 Baptism transplants into an invisible state. 

LECT. writing-reed or a dart has need of one to use it, so does grace 
- require believing minds. 

4. Such thou art receiving, no perishable instrument, but 
a spiritual. Henceforth thou art planted in the paradise 

rot ten- which the mind sees. Thou receivest a new name, which 

\ 

1S*. before thou hadst not: before thou wast a Catechumen, now 
thou wilt be a Believer. Henceforth thou art transplanted 
among the invisible olive trees, being grafted from the wild 
into the fruitful, from sins into righteousness, from pollution 
into purity. Thou hast communion in the Holy Vine : if 
then thou abide in the vine, thou shalt increase as a fruitful 
branch ; if thou abide not, thou shalt be utterly consumed by 
the fire. Let us then bear fruit, as is worthy ; God forbid 
that in us should be fulfilled what was done to the barren 
fig-tree, or that Jesus coming should even now curse us for 

Ps. 52, our barrenness. Rather, may all be able to say, / am like a 
green olive tree in tie house of God; my trust is in tlte tender 
mercy of God, for ever and ever, an olive tree not meeting 
the senses, but the mind, and full of light ; as then it is His 
part to plant and to water, so it is thine to bear fruit : it is 
God s to grant grace, thine to receive and preserve. Despise 
not the gift, because it is given freely, but when thou hast 
received it, devoutly treasure it. 

(5.) 5. The present is the season of Confession : confess there 
fore what thou hast done, whether in word, or in deed; 

2 Cor. whether in the day, or in the night ; confess in a time ac- 

6&gt; 2 * cepted, and in the day of salvation receive the heavenly 
treasure. Devote thy time to the Exorcisms ; be constant at 
the Catechisings, and store up in memory the matter of them, 
for they are spoken, not to the ears only, but that faith may 
stamp them on the mind ; wipe out from thee every care of 
earth ; thou art running for thy soul. Thou art utterly 
abandoning the things of the world ; what thou art abandon 
ing is little, what the Lord is giving is great. Forsake things 
present, have faith in things to come. Hast thou run so 
many circles of the year, fruitlessly devoted to the world, and 
wilt thou not for forty days, devote thyself to prayer, for thy 
soul s sake ? Be still, and know that I am God&gt; saith the 
Scripture. Give over talking many idle words, neither back- 

k* te &gt; nor l en( * a w *lh ng ear to backbiters, rather be prompt to 
1. 



Preparation necessary for Hapfisin. 13 

prayer. Shew by ascetic exorcises that thine heart is nerved. 
Cleanse thy vessel, that thou mayest receive the gift more 
abundant: for remission of sins is given equally to all: 
hut the communication of the Holy Ghost is bestowed ac 
cording to each man s faith. If thou hast laboured little, 
thou shall receive little : but if thou hast wrought much, 
ample is the hire: thou runnest for thyself: see to thine own 
interest. 

(&gt;. If thou hast aught against any man, forgive it: thou 
eoiiiest here to receive forgiveness of offences; thou art 
bound in turn to pardon the offender; else with what face 
wilt thou say to the Lord, Forgive me my many offences. Mat. is, 
while thou thyself hast not remitted even the small offence of , ~ v 
thy fellow-servant? Attend diligently at church: nol only 



now, when thy attendance is required by the Ministers, but also 
after thou hast received the gift : for if before it was good to 
do it, surely it must be good after the bestowal. If before thou 
wast grafted in, it was a safe course to be watered and tended, 
it is much more right after the planting. Wrestle for thine 
own soul, especially in days like these; nourish thy soul 
with sacred readings. For the Lord hath prepared for thee a 
spiritual table ; therefore do thou also say, after the Psalmist, 
The Lord is my Shepherd, therefore can I lack nothing ; Hep s .i3 t 
xhull feed me in a green pasture, and lead me forth beside the l 
waters of comfort ; He shall convert my soul; that Angels 
may share your joy, and Christ Himself the great High Priest, 
accepting your holy resolve and offering you one and all to 
the Father, may say, Behold /, and the children whom God Heb. 2, 
hath yiren ?Jf&gt;, May God Himself keep you all, well-pleasing 13 * 
in His sight. To whom be glory and power everlasting. 
Amen. 



LECTURE II. 

ON THE POWER OF REPENTANCE FOR THE REMISSION OF SIN. 






K/EKIEL xviii. 20 23. 

The righteousness of the rigltteous shall be upon him, and the 
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. But if the wicked 
will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all 
My statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall 
surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that he 
hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in It is 
righteousness that he hath done he shall live. Have I any 
pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God: 
and not that he should return from his ways, and live ? 

LECT. 1. SIN is a fearful thing, and unrighteousness is the sorest 
ailment of the soul, secretly sapping its sinews, and exposing 



y 
CtVTtZOU- 

ffia9 it to eternal fire; a self-chosen evil, the offspring of a man s 

gMHfi- set p ur p 0se O f m i n d. For that of our own purpose we sin, 

Jer. 2, the Prophet says plainly in one place. / planted thee a 

noble vine.tr/iollt/ a riaht seed: how then art thou turned 

+/ 7 

into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto Me ? The 
planting is good, the fruit evil : and that evil is from our 
purpose of mind. The planter is blameless, but the vine 
shall be burnt with fire: for it was planted for good, yet hath 

Eccles. of its own purpose borne fruit to evil. For God, according to 
29 the Preacher, hath made man upright ; but they have sought 

Eph. 2, out many inventions. And the Apostle says, We are His 
u orkmansliip, created unto good works. The Creator then, 
being good, created for good works : .but the creature, of its 
own set purpose, turned to wickedness. Sin, then, is a fearful 
evil, as was said, but not an incurable one; fearful to him who 
clings to it, but quite admitting of a cure when a man through 
penitence puts it off. For suppose a man holding fire in his 



Sin is from within and from the devil. 15 

band: while he holds the live coal, he is certainly on fire; 
but were he to put it away, he would also rid himself of that 
which was burning him. And if any think that while sinning, 
he is not on fire, to him saith the Scripture, Can a man take 1 rov. 6, 
Jire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned? For sin" 
burns the sinews of the soul. 

2. But some one will say, What can sin be ? Is it a living (2.) 
thing an angel an evil spirit? What is this which works in 
us ? It is no foe from without, O man, wrestling against 
thee : but a shoot of evil taking its increase from thyself. 
Let thine eyes look right on, and lust does not exist; keep Prov. 4, 
thine own, and take not another s, and a stop is put to 
robberv; remember the Judgment, and neither fornication, 
nor adultery, nor murder, nor any unrighteousness shall pre 
vail in thee. But when thou forgettest God, forthwith thou 
heginnest to devise wickedness, and to accomplish unrighte 
ousness. 

3. However, nature is not the sole cause of this evil ; there 
is another, who miserably prompts to it, the devil. He 
prompts all, yet he prevails only over those who listen to him. 
Therefore saith the Preacher, If a spirit of the powerful rise up Eccles. 
against thee, leave not tit y place. Shut thy door, and keep 
him far from thee,. and he shall not hurt thee. But if thou 
indulgently admit the thought of lust, through thine imagin 
ations, it will strike its roots into thee, and enthral thy mind, 

and drag thee down into a pit of evils. But perhaps thou 
sayest, I am a Believer; lust does not gain the ascendant over 
me, even though my mind dwells on the objects of it: knowest 
thou not that even a rock is cleft at length by a root which 
for a long while adheres to it? Admit not the seed, for it 
will break in pieces thy faith : root out the mischief, ere it 
blossom, lest by being idle at the beginning, thou have 
the trouble of axes and fire afterwards. When thine eyes 
first ail, attend to them in time, lest after thou art blinded 
thou begin to seek the physician. 

4. The devil then is the chief author of sin, and the parent (3.) 
of evils ; and this hath the Lord said, not I : The devil si tnieth 1 John 

3 8 

from the beginning; before him sinned no one. But he sinned, 
not as having received by necessity of nature the principle 
of sin; (else the blame of sin returns to Him who thus framed 



16 No extent of sin is beyond the power of repentance. 

LECT. him ;) but having been framed good, he became a devil from 
- his own purpose of mind, and received his name from his 
conduct. For being an Archangel, he was called devil, or 
slanderer, from his slandering ; and from a good servant of God, 
he became Satan fitly so named ; for Satan means an Adver 
sary. These doctrines are not mine, but the inspired prophet 
Ezekiel s. For he, taking up a lamentation against him, says, 

Ez. 28^ Thou scalest up the sum, full of wisdom, mid perfect in 
beauty, thou hast been in Eden, the garden of God; and 
soon after, Thou wast perfect in tlnj ways, from the day 
that tJtou wast created, till iniquity wot found in thee. Very 
rightly hath he said, irax found in tltce ; for it was not brought 
in from without, but thou thyself didst beget evil. And the 
reason he assigns afterwards: thine heart was lifted np, because 
of thy beaut y ; I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain 
of God, I will cast thee to the (jround. Parallel to this, is 
what the Lord says in the Gospel, / beheld Satan (is light 
ning fallen from heoren. Thou seest the harmony of the 
Old Testament with the New. He, on his falling, drew 
many away with him. He puts lusts into those who listen 
to him : from him is adultery, fornication, and all evil : 
through him our forefather Adam was cast out, and ex 
changed a paradise of wonderful and spontaneous fruits, for 
this earth with its thorns and thistles. 

(4.) 5. What then? some one will say. We have been seduced 
and are lost ; is there no chance of salvation ? We have 
fallen; cannot we rise? We have been blinded; cannot we 
recover our sight ? We have been crippled ; cannot our feet 
become straight again ? In a word, we are dead ; is there no 
resurrection ? Shall not He, O man, who woke Lazarus, a 
corpse of four days, which stank, shall not He much more 
easily raise up thee, a living man? He who shed His 
precious blood for us, the same shall rescue us from sin. 
Let us not give sentence against ourselves, brethren ; let us 
not abandon our case as hopeless : not to believe there is 
hope in penitence, is dreadful indeed. For he who is with 
out expectation of salvation, spares not to increase the evil ; 
but he who hopes for a cure, is easily induced to spare 
himself. Thus the robber who expects no mercy runs into 
recklessness; but if he hopes for pardon, often betakes himself 



Instances of Adam , Cain, and the Antediluvians. 17 

to repentance. Nay does the serpent strip himself of old age, 
and shall not we cast the slough of wickedness? Does thorny 
ground by good tillage become fruitful, and is salvation to us 
irrecoverable? Nature then admits of salvation; all that is 
wanting is the purpose of mind. 

6. God is loving to man, and that not a little. For say (5.) 
not, " I have committed whoredom and adultery : fearful 
things have been done by me, nor once only but often ; will 

He forgive, will lie forget?" Hear what the Psalmist says;Ps-3i, 
O how plentiful is Thy yoodness, O Lord. Thy accumulated 
sins surpass not the multitude of the mercies of God; thy 
wounds baffle not the skill of the chief Physician. Only 
give thyself to Him in faith: tell the Physician thine ail 
ment ; say thou also as David did ; / sa id, I will confess my Ps. 32, 
.w /;.v intto the Lord: and what he says next shall also be 
fulfilled in thee; And so Thoir forgarest the icickedness of 

1HV .V//f. 

7. Wotildest thou see the loving-kindness of God, O thou 
that art lately come to the Catechising ? wouldest thou see 
the loving-kindness of God, and the abundance of His long- 
suffering? Plear thou concerning Adam. Adam disobeyed, 

.the first whom God created; might He not at once have 
visited him with death? But see what the Lord does, in 
His great love towards man : though He casts him out of 
Paradise, his sin making him unfit to continue there, yet He 
places him opposite to Paradise, that seeing what he had 
forfeited, and what a downfall he had suffered, he thenceforth 
might be saved by repentance. Cain, the first born man, -&lt;jen. 
became a fratricide, a deviser of evils, the cause of niur- s tuag 
ders, and the first who envied; yet when he had slain his vers - 
brother, to what is he doomed? a fuyitice and a vagabond Gen. 4, 
shalt thoit be in the earth. How great the sin ? how light 12 
the doom ! 

8. This then in very deed is loving-kindness in God, yet 
it is small compared with what follows : for consider, I pray, 
the history of Xoe. The giants sinned, and lawlessness was 
there lavishly poured out upon the earth ; and in con 
sequence the deluge was ordained to come upon it. In his 
five hundredth year God puts forth the threat, and in his six 
hundredth He brought the deluge on the earth. Seest thou 

c 



18 Instance ofHahab an encouragement to penitent sinners. 

LECT. the breadth of God s loving-kindness, extending over the 
- IL .. space of a hundred years ? what He did then after the hundred 
years, could He not have done at once ? but on purpose did 
He extend it, to give room for repentance. Seest thou the 
goodness of God ? And had those men repented, they would 
not have come short of His loving-kindness. 

(6.) 9. Let us proceed to others, who have been saved by re 
pentance. Perchance some among the women will say, " I have 
committed whoredom and adultery, I have defiled my body 
with excesses; is there salvation?" Cast thine eyes, O woman, 
to Rahab, and do thou also expect salvation ; for if she who 
openly and publicly committed whoredom was saved through 
repentance, shall not she, who has committed one such act 
before the gift of grace, be saved through penitence and by 
fastings ? For enquire how she was saved : this only said 
Josh. 2, S h 6j The Lord your God, He is God in heaven above, and hi 
earth beneath. Your God, for she dared not call Him her 
own, on account of her unchastity. And if thou wouldest 
receive a written witness that she was saved, thou hast it 
Ps. 87, recorded in the Psalms, / -will think upon Rah ah and Habylon 
4 * with them that knotc me a . Oh the great loving-mercy of God, 
which makes mention even of harlots in the Scriptures : and 
not simply / will think upon Rahab and Babylon, but with 
this added, with them that knotc me. On men therefore, and 
likewise on women, is salvation, viz. that which is secured 
to us through repentance. 

10. And though the people sin as one body, it does not 

suqjass God s loving-kindness. The people made a calf, yet 

did not God give over His loving-kindness. Men denied God, 

Exod. but God denied not Himself. These are thy gods, O Israel, 

*5O A 

Vid is * ne y sa -id ; yet again, as was His wont, The God of Israel 

63, 8. became their Saviour. And not only did the people sin, but 

Deut. 9, Aaron too the high-priest. For it is Moses who says, And 

upon Aaron came the icrath of the Lord ; and I entreated, 

3 In the Psalm referred to, Rahab doned woman in the Revelations for 

stands for Egypt. Vid. Ps. 89, 10. Isai. impenitent Babylon. And as what is 

51, 9. S.Jerome, in Ps. 87, 4. considers said of Hagar in Gen. 21, 10. is meant 

Rahab a type of the Gtntile Church of Jerusalem, so Rahab may really be 

called out of Jericho, the world. Egypt named in this Psalm, yet Egypt meant 

in the Psalm is a type of the same. Peni- as its scope, and beyond that the Gentile 

tent Rahab then may as naturally stand Church, 
for a type of penitent Egypt, as the aban- 



Instance of the Israelites and Aaron in making the y olden calf. 19 

ho says, for 7/w,, and God forgave him. What then? Did 
Moses, entreating for a high-priest who had sinned, prevail 
with the Lord, and does not Jesus, the Only-begotten, when 
lie entreats for us, prevail with God? And did He admit 
Aaron, in spite of his fall, to the high-priesthood, and will 
He obstruct thy entrance to salvation who art come from the 
(J entiles? Repent, O man, henceforth thyself, and the gift 
shall not be withheld thee. Present thy conduct unrebuk- 
able before Him henceforward: for God is in very truth 
loving to man, nor can the whole race of man worthily tell 
out His loving-kindness. No, not if all the tongues of men 
were to come together, could they even thus unfold some part 
of His loving-kindness. For we declare some part of what 
is written concerning His loving-kindness to men: but we 
know not how much He forgave to Angels : for them also did 
lie forgive 6 , since One only is sinless, Jesus, who purgeth our 
sins; but of these enough. 

11. If thou wilt, I will set before thee additional precedents (7.) 
respecting our state. Let us come to the blessed David, and 
take him for an ensample of repentance. He fell, that highly 
gifted man. Walking in the evening-tide on the house-top 



b Very little having been authorita- of the Fathers considered, that, besides 

tively delivered to the Apostles on the the devil and his angels, who were be- 

subject of the Angels, what was believed yond grace, there were orders of angels 

or surmised in the early Church seems to still on their trial, or who were, or had 

have been gathered from various sources, been, responsible for more or less of sin, 

trustworthy and not ; and cf the latter or in danger of sin, and within the reach 

especially Platonism. The proof that the of mercy, or who on their trial had sinned 

sources in question were not apostolic, more or less, and been forgiven, as Cyril 

is the discordance or uncertainly of the seems here to hold. (vid. Nyss. vol. ii. 

opinions themselves. The Fathers indeed p. 6-14. Hieron. in Eph. 4, 16. Am- 

bear witness concordaritly to the truth, brosiast. in Eph. 3, 10. Origen. Tom. 

that God alone is simply and absolutely 13, 28. in Luc. Horn. 35. Ignat. ad 

perfect and above all judgment, using it Smyrn. 6. Nazianz. Carm. p. 169.) 

ii argument for the divinity of the Such, for instance, (as they considered,) 

Son and the Holy Ghost, that they too were the tutelary angels of countries, 

are sinless or beyond judgment, (vid. places, or persons. Origen. in Num. 

Clem. Pa?d:g.i. 2. Origen. in Cant.Hom. Horn. 20. 8. Hieron. in Mich. 6. 1. 

3. fin. Theodor.in Num. 9. Ambros.de Sp. And such " the Sons of God," who 

S. iii. 18. n. 13-2, &c. Hieron. inPelag.3. were seduced in the interval between 

p. 203. col. 1. Athan.Orat.in Arian.ii.6. the creation and the flood. (Justin. Apol. 

Ainbros. in Fid. v. 11. n. 140, 141. ii. 5. Athenag. Apol. 24. Iren. iv. 16. 

Cyril Alex. Thesaur.21. They built this Clem. Strom, v. p. 550. Tertull. de 

doctrine on such passages of Scripture as Idolatr. 9. Ambros. de Noe, iv. 8. 9. 

Job4,is. kfv. 2. and . {.(which they con- Nazianz. Carm. p. 64.) Origen, and 

siiU-red to imply the truth of the literal even Gregory Nys-rn, are accused of 

eensein the truth of the figurative, which admitting the restoration of the author 

\\ -as primarily and directly intended.)Col. of evil. Vid. Diss. Bened. in Cyril. 

1,20. Eph. 3 , 10. Acts I7,31.&c. Some iii. f&gt;. 

c2 



20 TJie power of Confession in the instances of David, 

LECT. after his sleep, he looked unguardedly, and was moved by 
human passion. His sin was completed ; but in it perished 



not that nobleness of mind which confesses a transgression. 
Nathan the prophet came, swiftly, to detect and to heal his 

2 Sam. wound. The Lord is wroth, he says, and thou hast sinned. 
So spoke the subject to him who had the kingdom ; yet the 
king, though in purple clad, did not take it ill, as regarding 
not the speaker, but Him that sent him. He was not 
blinded by the military circle which stood about him ; for his 
mind discerned the Lord s angelical host, and as seeing the 
Invisible, lie submitted in the anguish, replying to his visitor, 
or rather through him to Him who sent him, / hare sinned 
against the Lord. Thou seest how a king could be humble- 
minded, how he could make confession. Had it been brought 
home to him by any one ? Were many privy to the matter ? 
The matter was done quickly, and forthwith the Prophet 
came an accuser, and the sinner acknowledges the crime. 
And according to the frankness of his confession was the 
speed of his cure, for the prophet Nathan who had threatened 
him, says straightway, And the Lord hath put an ay tlnj sin. 
Thou seest how very quick was the relenting of the God of 
loving-kindness. ^ et he says, Thou Jiast (/iren great occasion 
to the enemies of the Lord to blasp1ie)ne. For though on 
account of thy righteousness thou hadst many foes., yet thy 
self-comrnand was thy protection ; but now that thou hast let 
go thy best weapon, thy foes, who were standing ready, are 
risen up against thee. The Prophet then thus comforted him. 
12. But holy David, for all he heard it said, The Lord hath 
put aicay thy sin, shrunk not from penitence, king though he 
was : but put on sackcloth for purple, and for his gilded 
throne sat down, a king, in ashes on the ground ; not only 

Ps. 102, sat but fed on ashes, (as he saith himself, / hare eaten ashes 
as it were bread,} and wasted with tears his lustful eye. 

Ps. 7, 7. Every night, he says, icash I my led and water my couch 
with my tears. When his lords urged him to eat bread, he 
would not: for seven whole days he prolonged his fast. If a 
king thus made confession, oughtest not thou a private man 
to make confession ? And after Absalom s rebellion, though 
he had many roads for escaping, he chose to flee by the 
Mount of Olives, all but invoking mentally the Redeemer who 



Solomon, Ahab, Jeroboam, and Maiiasseh. *21 

should thence ascend to heaven. And when Shimei cursed 2 Sam - 
him bitterly, he said. Let him alone; for he knew that he who \\\ 
forgiveth, shall be forgiven. 

13. Thou seest how excellent it is to confess; thou seest (g \ 
that to the penitent there is salvation. Solomon also fell ; 

but what saith he? Afteru nnh 1 repented*. Though Ahab,p rov 
king of Samaria, was a most abandoned idolater, a monster, 24, 32. 
the murderer of prophets, a stranger to godliness, the coveter^" 
of other men s fields and vineyards, yet when the prophet 
Elias came to him after he had slain Naboth through Jezebel, 
and only threatened him, he rent his clothes and put on sack 
cloth ; and what says the merciful God to Elias ? Seest thou 1 Ki 
hotr Ahnb h umbleth himself before Me ? as if, almost, He would 2 1 , 29. 
persuade the fiery temper of the prophet to condescend to the 
penitent: for 1 trill not bring, He saith, the evil in his days. 
Thus, though Ahab on his pardon was not about to leave his 
evil courses, the God of pardon pardoned him ; not as igno 
rant of the future, but bestowing on the penitence of the 
moment its corresponding pardon : for a just judge suitably 
answers each case as it arises. 

14. Again, as Jeroboam stood sacrificing to idols on the , Q . 
altar, his hand withered, when he bade seize the Prophet 
who denounced him. On this experience of his power, he 
says, Entreat the face of the Lord thy God ; and for this , K a 
word his hand was restored. If the Prophet healed Jero- 13, 6. 
boam, has not Christ healing power to deliver thee from thy 

sins ? Manasses, again, was most extravagant in his crimes, 
who sawed asunder Esaias, and was polluted with idolatries 
of every kind, and filled Jerusalem with innocent blood : yet, 
when he was led captive to Babylon, he converted his afflic 
tions into a healing course of penitence : for Scripture says, 
that Manasses humbled himself greatly before the Cod of his 
father*, and prayed to Him ; and He nas entreated of him, 33, 12. 
and heard his supplications, and brought him again into his 1 * 
kingdom. If he who sawed a Prophet in sunder, was saved 
through penitence, mayest not thou be saved, who hast not 
done ought so great ? 

c The following Fathers agree with init. vid. also in Eccles. 1, 12. The op- 
Cyril in considering that Solomon re- posite opinion is held by others ; e. g. 
pented; Hilar. in Ps.52.n. 12. Ambros. apparentlyby Aug.inPs. 126. n.2. Basil. 
Apol. David. 3. n. 13. Hieron. Ep. 85 Ep. 42. n. 2. 



22 In the instances of Hezekiah^ 



LECT. 
II. 



15. Beware lest tliou rashly mistrust its power : wouldest 
DU know how great force it hath ? wouldest thou know this 



strong weapon of salvation, and learn what strength Con 
fession hath ? An hundred and eighty-five thousand enemies 
did Hezekias turn to flight through Confession. Yet great as 
this really is, it is but trifling compared with what is still to 
be told. Through repentance, the same king recalled a Divine 
decree which had already gone forth. For when he was sick, 

2 Kings Esaias said to him, Set thy house in order ; for thou, shalt die, 
and not lice. What was there to expect more? what remain 
ing hope of life, when the Prophet said, For thou shalt die ? 
Yet Ezekias did not stflp from penitence ; for remembering 

Isa. 30, what was written, .For turning away and siyhiny thou 



he sai-ed, he turned away to the wall, and lifting his thoughts 
from his bed heavenwards, (for no thickness of walls hinder 
prayers devoutly offered up,) he said, " Lord, remember me : 
for it is sufficient for my cure that Thou remember me. 
Thou art not controlled by times, but Thou Thyself givest 
law to life ; for not on our nativity, and on stars in conjunc 
tion, depends our life, as some idly talk ; but of life and its 
duration Thou Thyself art the Lawgiver, according to Thy 
will." And thus he, who through the prophet s sentence 
despaired of life, received an addition of fifteen years, the 
sun, in sign of it, tracing his course back. Now the sun 
turned back for Ezekias ; for Christ, it was eclipsed ; not 
retracing its steps, but suffering eclipse, and thereby 
shewing the difference of the two, Ezekias and Jesus. 
Ezekias prevailed to the cancelling of a sentence of God ; 
and will not Jesus vouchsafe His free gift, the forgiveness 
of sins ? Turn away, and bewail thyself, shut to thy door, 
and pray Him to forgive thee, and remove from around thee 
Dan. 3. the burning fires; for Confession d has strength to quench 
6 * even fire ; has strength to tame even lions. 

d The ecclesiastical word l|^flAo y)J( n,-, of sin. Psalms, Hymns, Creeds, are 

here translated Confession, means pro- Confessions. E&pMfeyciMi and Confi- 

perly a declaration in God s presence of temini, are the words used respectively in 

the facts of religion of whatever kind, the Septuagint and Vulgate versions of 

with relation to God or man ; and is the Psalms, for " Praise," and " Give 

thus contrasted with Prayer, which con- thanks to the Lord." Hence S. Cyril 

templates objects not realized as yet. here calls the Song of the Three Chil- 

Praise, thanksgiving, profession of our dren, and the meditations of Daniel in the 

faith, are parts of it, as well as confession lions den, Confessions ; whereas, grant- 



The Three Chiltlmi, and Nebuchadnezzar, 23 

10. But if thou disbelieve, consider what befel Ilananiah (11.) 
and the rest. What fountains did they open ? How manysha- 
waterpots had quenched a flame, which rose to forty -nine jj[ achf 
cubits? But wherever the flame exceeded ever so little, shach, 
there faith gushed out like a river, and there they uttered 



spell against their sufferings, saying, Just art Thou, O Lord,S Vw. 
orcr all thing* ichich Thou hast done towards us* : for 



have sinned, and broke Thy commandments. And penitence Three 
destroyed the flames. If thou disbelieve that it can quench the ^ren, 4, 
fire of hell, learn it from the history of Ilananiah. But some &c - 
quick hearer will say, " Them God rescued justly ; because 
they would not commit idolatry, God gave them this power." 
Since this has been suggested, I will proceed to one more 
example of penitence. 

17. What thinkest thou of Nebuchadonosor ? Hast thou 
not heard from the Scriptures that he was bloodthirsty, 
savage, having a lion s mind ? hast thou not heard how 
he disinterred the bones of the kings ? how he led the people 
into captivity ? how he blinded the eyes of the reigning 
prince, first giving him to see the slaughter of his children ? 
Hast thou not heard that he broke to pieces the cherubim, 
not the invisible no, suppose it not, O man but the carved 
cherubim ; and that mercy-seat, from which God used to 
speak audibly ? Nebuchadonosor trampled down the veil 
of holiness : he carried off the censer to a temple of idols ; he 
seized on all the offerings ; and burned down the Temple to 
its foundations ? What multiplied punishments did he de 
serve for slaying kings, setting fire to holy things, leading 
captive the chosen people, and placing the sacred vessels 
within idol temples ? Was he not worthy of ten thousand 
deaths ? 

18. Such was the greatness of his evil deeds ; now turn to 

the loving-kindness of God. He was turned into a wild Dan. 4. 
beast; he abode in the wilderness, he was scourged that he 
might be saved. He had claws like a lion, for he made the 
saints his prey ; he had a lion s mane, for he was a ratnping p s&lt; 2 2 
and a roaring lion. He ate grass as an ox; for h was as 13 - 
cattle not knowing Him who had given him the kingdom. 



they were confessions of " the sin of 20.) still they were much more. 
their people," (Song, 5 10. Dan. 9, e i.e. Towards Thy people Israel. 



4 J4 and of St. Peter. 

m.* 

\ 

i-i or. His body was bathed with the dew, because he had already 
seen the fire quenched by dew, and believed not. And 



Son g 27. what happened? After these things, he saith, / 

cliadnezzar lifted up mine eye* unto heare/i, find I blessed 
the J\Iost Hi(jli-&gt; and I praiwd and honoured Him ilial liveth 

Dan. 4, for ever. When, therefore, he perceived the Most High, and 
offered up sounds of thanksgiving to God, and came to feel 
grief for what he had done, and learnt his own weakness, 
then God restored to him the honour of the kingdom. 
(12.) 19. What then? Hath He given Nebuchadonosor, after such 
acts, pardon and the kingdom, on his confession, and shall He 
not give to thee on repenting the forgiveness of sins, and the 
kingdom of heaven, if thy life be in accordance? The Lord is 
loving to men, and swift to pardon, slow to vengeance ; let 
no one then despair of his own salvation. Peter, the chiefest 
and first of the Apostles, before a little maid thrice denied the 
Lord ; but when remorse touched him he wept bitterly; and 
to weep shews a heartfelt penitence. Wherefore, not only 
received he forgiveness for the denial, but was spared his 
Apostolic dignity. 

20. Having then, brethren, many ensamples of men who 
have sinned, and repented, and been saved, do ye also 
heartily make your confession to the Lord : that ye may both 
receive the pardon of your past sins, and be counted worthy 
of the heavenly gift, and inherit the heavenly kingdom with 
all the Saints in Christ Jesus ; to whom is the glory for ever 
and ever, Amen. 



LECTURE III 

ON HOLY BAPTISM. 



ROMANS vi. 3, 4. 

Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus 
Christ, were baptized into His death ? Therefore we are buried 
with Him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised 
up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also 
should icalk in newness of life. 

LET the hetircHs rejoice, and let the earth be glad, for those Ps. 96, 
who are to be sprinkled with hyssop ; to be cleansed with the 
invisible hyssop, by His power, who at His passion received 
the hyssop and the reed. Let the Heavenly Powers rejoice, 
and let the souls now to be joined to their Invisible Spouse, 
get ready. For there is the voice of one crying in the wz /cfer- Is. 40, 3. 
HCM, Make ready the u~ay of the Lord. For this is no light 
nuittcr, no ordinary and chance union according to the flesh : 
but the All-searching Spirit s election that is of faith. For 
the world s espousals and arrangements are not always made 1 Cor. 
with judgment ; but wealth or beauty forthwith attracts the 
bridegroom ; here it is not beauty of person, but the soul s 
clear conscience, not the condemned mammon, but the soul 
rich in seriousness. 

2. Yield then, O ye children of righteousness, to John s 
persuasion, exhorting you, and saying, Make straight the John ], 

t\ o 

way of the Lord. Remove all blocks and stumbling-stones, 
that ye may hold straight on unto life eternal. Make ready 
the chambers of the soul, purifying them through faith un 
feigned, for the reception of the Holy Ghost. Begin to wash 
your robes through penitence, that when summoned to the 
bride-chamber ye may be found clean. For the Bridegroom 
invites indeed all without conditions, because His grace is 
ish, and the voice of His loud-sounding Heralds brings 



26 The Water of Baptism ?ias in it a power of cleansing the soul. 

LKCT. together all ; but ever afterwards He is separating between 
those who have come in to the figurative marriage-feast. O 



Mat. 22, may none of those now enrolled hear those words, Friend* 

12 

how cumest tltou in hi/her, not having a wedding-garment ? 

Mat. 25, But may you all hear it said, Well done, good and faithful 
servant; tltou hast been faithful over a few things; I will 
make thee ruler over many things ; enter thou into the joy of 
thy Lord. Hitherto thou hast stood without the gate ; may 
Cant. 1, you all be able to say, The King hath brought me info His 
Is. 61 chambers. My soul shall be joyful in my God, for He halli 
10. Sept. clothed me uith the garments of salvation. He hath covered 
me with the robe of rigftteousnett, as a bridegroom deckel h 
himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with 
Eph. 5, her jewel*: so that all your souls may be found not having 
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. I say not, before you 
have received the gift ; (if so, why should you be now called 
to the remission of sins ?) but so that, on its being given, your 
conscience being found blameless, may keep pace with it. 
(2.) 3. This is in truth a serious matter, brethren, and you must 
approach it solemnly. You are, each of you, on the point of 
being presented to God, before innumerable hosts of Angels : 
the Holy Ghost is on the point of setting a seal on your 
souls: ye are coming for enlistment under the Great King. 
Make ready therefore; prepare, not by wearing robes of 
shining whiteness, but arraying the soul with the devoutness 
of a clear conscience. Regard the Sacred Laver not as simple 
water ; regard rather the spiritual grace given with the water. 
For as the sacrifices at the altars, being by nature without 
meaning, by invocation of the idols become polluted, so 
contrariwise, plain water, after the invocation of the Holy 
Ghost, and of Christ, and of the Father, gains a sanctifying 
power. 

4. For whereas man s nature is twofold, soul and body, 
twofold also is his cleansing; the spiritual for the spiritual, 
the material for his body. The water cleanses his body, the 
Heb. 10, Spirit seals his soul: that being by the Spirit sprinkled in 
heart, and trashed in body with pure water, ice may draw 
near to God. Now then that thou art to descend into the 
waters, consider not the bare element; look for its saving 
power by the operation of the Holy Ghost ; for without the 



Symbolical use of water in the Old Testament. 27 

t\vo tliou canst not be made perfect. This is not my word, 
but the Lord Jesus Christ s, who has the power to do it; He 
sailh, Except a man be born again ^ and he enlarges, of if at cr Joh.3,3. 
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. 
Neither he who is baptized with water, without the privilege 
of the Spirit, hath the gift entire ; nor be he ever so virtuous 
in his deeds, shall he enter into the kingdom of heaven, except 
with the seal vouchsafed through water. A bold word, but it 
is not mine ; Jesus hath uttered it ; and here is the proof of 
it from Holy Scripture. Cornelius was a just man; he was Acts 10. 
honoured with visions of Angels ; he had raised his prayers 
and alms in the sight of God, as a goodly monument in the 
heavens. Peter came, and the Spirit was poured on them 
that believed, and they spake with other tongues, and pro 
phesied. Yet after the gift of the Spirit, the Scripture saith, 
that IVter commanded them to be baptized in the name of 
Jesus Christ: that the soul having been regenerated through 
their faith, the body also, by means of the water, might share 
the gift 3 . 

5. And if any one is anxious to know, why the gift is 
given through water and not through some other element, let 
him take up Holy Scripture, and he shall learn. For water 
is a noble thing, and, of the world s four visible elements, the 
most beautiful. Heaven is the abode of Angels, and the 
heavens are of the waters: earth is the place of men, and the 
earth is of the waters : and before all the six davs fashioning 



of creation, the Spirit of God moved on the face of the waters. Gen. 1, 
Water was the beginning of the world : the Jordan was the 
beginning of the Gospel preaching. Rescue from Pharaoh 
came to Israel through the sea : rescue from sins to the world 
through the Lavcr of icater by the word of God. Where there Eph. 5, 
is a covenant with any, there also is water : after the flood, a 26 
covenant was made with Noc : a covenant with Israel from 
Mount Sina; but u-ith icater, and scarlet wool, and liyssop. Heb. 9, 
J-lias is received up, but not without water: for first he 19 
crosses Jordan, then horses carry him to heaven. The high- 
priest first bathes, and then burns incense: for Aaron first 

* S. Cyril considers that Cornelius August. Serin. 269. n. 2. and Chrysost. 
and his friends were regenerated, as the in Act. Apost. Horn. 25. seem to" do. 
Apostles were, apart from Baptism ; 



28 John, the greatest of Prophets, dispensed pardon through water. 

LECT. bathed, and then was made high-priest; for how might lie 
intercede for the rest, who had not yet been cleansed by 



water? Moreover the Laver, set apart within the Tabernacle, 
was an emblem of Baptism. 

(3.) 6. Baptism is the end of the Old Testament, and the be 
ginning of the New. For John who began it, than whom 
was not one greater among those born of women, was the end 

Mat. 11, of the Prophets ; for (ill the Law and the Prophets icere until 
John. Moreover, he was the first-fruits of the Gospel-state, 

Mark ],for it is said, The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, fyc. 

** and then,Johit tens in the desert baptizing. You may instance 
indeed Elias the Tishbite, who was taken to heaven, yet is 
not greater than John. Enoch was translated, yet he is not 
greater than John. Moses was the greatest lawgiver, and the 
Prophets are all wonderful men, yet not greater than John. 
I do not venture to compare prophet with prophet : but their 

Mat. 11, Master and ours, the Lord Jesus, hath declared ; Among those 
that are born of women, there hafh not risen a greater than 
John. Not " among those born of virgins," but born of 
icomen. The comparison is between the chief servant, and 
his fellow-servants : for the Son s preeminence and grace over 
the household is beyond all comparison. Seest thou how 
great a man God hath chosen to be the first minister of this 
grace ? a man possession-less and solitary, yet not a misan 
thrope; eating locusts, and pluming his soul for heaven; 
feasting on honey, and speaking what is sweeter and more 
wholesome ; clad in camel s hair, and shewing in himself 
what an ascetic s life should be : who also while yet borne 
in his mother s womb, was sanctified by the Holy Ghost. 
Jeremiah was sanctified, but he prophesied not in the womb : 
only John, while yet unborn, leaped lor joy: and though he 
saw not with the eyes of the flesh, knew his Master by the 
Spirit : for since great was the grace of Baptism, great must 
needs be its minister. 
(4^ 7. He began to baptize in Jordan, and all Jerusalem went 

Mat. 3, out to him, enjoying the first-fruits of Baptism: for the 
prerogative in all good things was in Jerusalem. But, men 
of Jerusalem, observe how they that went out were baptized 
of him : confessing their sins, saith he. First they shewed 
their wounds, then he applied the remedies, and gave to 



Necessity of preparation for Baptism. 29 

them that believed, redemption from eternal fire b . And if 
thou wouldest be persuaded of this, that the Baptism of John 
is redemption from the peril of fire, hear thou him saying, 
Ye generation of rijws, icJio hath warned you to jiee from Mat. 3, 
the icralh to come / Be thou then no longer a viper, he 
saith, but as thou hast been one of the brood, put. off thy 
former sinful self. And as the snake is wont to delve into 
some corner to cast away his age, and rubbing off his old 
slouuh, is henceforth young in body ; so thou too, saith he, 
force thee through the narrow and strait gate : and roughly 
handling thee with fasting, strip thee of thy ruin; put offProv. 
the old man with his deeds, and say in the words of the Se t&lt; 
C anticles, I have put off my coal, how shall [put it on ? Cant. 5, 

But perhaps there is some one among you, a hypocrite, a 
man-pleader, professing religion, but not believing from his 
heart: having the hypocrisy of Simon Magus, approaching 
not to partake of grace, but busily to pry into what is given. 
Let this one also hear from John, And note also the axe 2.9 Mat. 3, 
laid unto the root of the trees, therefore every tree irhich 
brinyelh not forth good J rnii, is hen n dotni, and cast into the 
Jire. The Judge cannot be worked upon; so put away 
crisy. * 

. 8. What then oughtest thou to do? and what are the fruits (5.) 
of repentance ? He that hath two coats, let him impart to Luke 3, 
him that hath none. Trustworthy was the teacher, as being 
the first to do what he taught; he had no shame in speaking, 
whose tongue was not checked by conscience. And he that 
hath meat, let hint do likewise. Wouldest thou enjoy the 
grace of the Holy Ghost, yet countest the poor unworthy of 
earthly meats ? Seekest thou great things, yet givest not of 
small ? Though thou be a publican, though a fomicator, 
yet hope for salvation ; The publicans and the harlots go into Mm. 21, 
the kingdom of (, od before you: and Paul witnesseth the 31 
same, saying, Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor any of \ COT. 6, 
this sort, shall inherit the kingdom of God; and such were 9 1 
some of yon ; Inii ye are washed, but ye are sanctified. He 
saith not, such arc some ofyox f \)\it such were some of you. 

b That S. John s Baptism conveyed p. 914. Aug. de Bapt. v. 11. Christian 
remission of sins, seems to be the Baptism having the further gift of the 
opinion also of Nyss. in Laud. B;is. Holy Ghost. 



30 Martyrs alone are saved without Baptism. 

LECT. Sin in the state of ignorance is pardoned, but depravity which 

continues is condemned. 

(6.) 9. Thou hast, as the glory of Baptism, the Son of God 
Himself, the Only-begotten. For why should I henceforth 
speak of man ? John was great, but what is he to the Lord ? 
Loud was that voice, but what is it to the Word ? Most 
glorious was the herald, but what to the King ? Glorious 
was he who baptized with water, but what to Him who bap- 
tizeth with the Holy Ghost and with fire? With the Holy 
Ghost and with fire the Saviour baptized the Apostles, when 

Acts2,2. suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing 

mighty icind, and it Jilled all the house where they were 

sitting; and there appeared unto them cloven tongues as of 

fire, and it sate upon each of them, and they were all Jilled 

with the Holy Ghost. 

(7.) 10. Unless a man receive Baptism, he hath not salvation; 
except Martyrs alone, who even without the water, receive the 
kingdom. For the Saviour who redeemed the world through 
the Cross, when His side was pierced, gave forth blood and 
water : that in times of peace men should be baptized with 
water, in times of persecution with their own blood. For the 

Mark Saviour was minded to call martyrdom, Baptism, saying, Can 

9 ye drink of the cup which I drink of, and be baptized with 

the baptism that I am baptized with ? Martyrs too make 

1 Cor. confession, bei)ig made a, spectacle to the world, and to Angels, 
and to men: and thou shalt make confession shortly: but it 

tf 

is not yet time for thee to hear concerning these matters. 
(8.) 11. Jesus sanctified Baptism, being Himself baptized. 
Since the Son of God was baptized, what religious man can 
despise Baptism ? He, however, was baptized, not to receive 
forgiveness of sins, for He was sinless: but being sinless, 
to grant divine grace and dignity to the baptized. Since the 
Heb. 2, children are partakers of flesh and blood. He also Himself 
rt f i 9 . likewise shared the same, that we, partaking of His bodily 
0&gt;g*0c/ p rcs ence, might partake also of His divine grace; and so 
if *oi- again Jesus was baptized, that through this also, we by the 
participation, might with salvation receive dignity. The 
Job 40, Dragon was in the waters, according to Job, he who re- 
23 e ^ ceiveth Jordan in his mouth: whereas then He was to crush 

Engl. the heads of the Dragon, He descended, and in the waters 

vevs. 






Raptism a necessary introduction to preaching the Gospel. 31 

bound the mighty one, that we might receive power to tread Pa. 74, 
upon serpents &lt;i)id scorpions. It was no common monster, 



lint a terrible one. \&lt;&gt; *////&gt; of fishers could bear one scale o/Mob 40, 

C\ ^ C! 

hi* tail: before him ran destruction, wasting those that en 
countered him. Life then encountered him, that henceforth 
the- month of death might be closed, that we the saved might 
all say, () death, where is tlnj sting? O grave, where is thy\ Cor. 
rtctory ? By Baptism, the sting of death is destroyed. 

1-2. Thou descendest into the water bearing sins, but the (9.) 
invocation of grace having sealed thy soul, allows not that 
them shouldest henceforth be swallowed up by the fearful 
Dragon. Dead in sins thou wentest down, quickened in "* Vld * 
righteousness thou comest up: for if thou wert planted*. 3. 
together in the likeness of the Saviour s death, thou shall Rom - 6, 
be counted worthy of His resurrection also. For as Jesus 
took on Him the world s sins, and died, that having been 
the death of sin, He might raise thee up in righteousness, 
so thou also, by descending into the water, and in some sense 
being in the waters buried, as He was in the rock, are raised 
again, to walk in newness of life. 

13. Afterwards, when thou hast been counted worthy of 
the gift, He gives to thee the faculty to wrestle against 
the powers that are against thee c . For like as after His 
baptism, He was tempted forty days, not because He could 
not overcome even before this, but because He would do all 
things regularly and in order, so thou also, though before 
Baptism afraid to wrestle with thine adversaries, yet when 
thou slialt have received the grace, being henceforth confident 

in the ami our of righteousness, do battle, and, if thou wilt, 2 Cor. 8, 
preach the Gospel. 7&lt; 

14. Jesus Christ was the Son of God, yet before Baptism (10.) 
He preached not. If the Master Himself entered upon His 
time in regular order, ought we the servants to venture out of 
order ? Jesus began to preach from the time that the Holy 
Ghost descended upon Him in a bodily shape, like a dove: not 

that Jesus might see Him as if for the first time; (for He knew 
Him even before lie came in a bodily shape ;) but that John 
who baptized Him, might behold Him. For, as he says, John 1, 
/ knew Him not: but He who sent me to baptize with water, 33 

c i. e. in Confirmation. Cat. xvii. n. 36, 37. Vid. Cat. \xi. n. 4. 



32 Baptism cleanses from even the greatest sins. 

LECT. the same said unto me* Unto whom thou sltalt see the Spirit 
III. 
descending, and remaining upon Him, Ihc name is He. And 



if thou hast seriousness unfeigned, the Holy Ghost is coming 
down on thee likewise, and upon thee, the Father s voice shall 
sound from on high, not, " He is my son," but, " He hath now 

John l, become My son." For " is" belongs to Him alone; since //* 
the beginning teas the Word, and the Word teas tcith God, 
and the Word was God. To Him belongs that word, " Is;" 
since at all times He is the Son of God; but to thee belongs, 
" Is now become;" since thou hast not the Son ship by nature, 
but receivest it by adoption: He is Son eternally; thou re- 
ceivest this grace by advancement. 
(11.) 15. Therefore, make ready the vessel of thy soul, that thou 

Rom. 8, mayest become a Son of God, an Heir of God, and Joint- 
heir with Christ ; if thou preparest thyself, that thou mayest 
also receive; if thou by faith drawest near, that thou mayest 
be made a faithful man ; if thou of thine own set purpose put 
away the old man. For everything that thou hast committed 
shall be forgiven thee, even fornication, or adultery, or any 
other sort of licentiousness. What is greater than crucifying 
Christ? Yet even of this is Baptism a purification. For 
thus spake Peter to the three thousand who came to him ; 
and they the crucifiers of the Lord, when they asked and 

Acts 2, said, Men &lt;uid brethren, -what shall we do? for great is our 

f\ ^t C f f* 

wound; thou hast turned our thoughts, O Peter, to our fall, 
in saying, Ye have killed the Prince of life. What salve is 
there for so great a wound ? What cleansing for so great 
pollution ? What salvation for so great a death r to them, I 
say, Peter saith, Repent, and be baptized each of yon in the 
name of Jesus Christ our Lord for the remission of sins, and 
(12.) ye shall receive the gift of the Holt/ Ghost. O unspeakable 
loving-kindness of God! they look not for salvation, and 
they are vouchsafed the Holy Ghost. Behold the power of 
Baptism ! If any of you hath by blasphemous words crucified 
Christ; if any of you hath through ignorance denied Him 
before men ; if any of you, through wicked works, hath led 
to the doctrine s being evil spoken of, let him be of good hope 
in repenting, for the same grace is also present now. 
?4 P ^V 3 I** Be of good courage, Jerusalem, the Lord will take 

Sept. away all thine iniquities. The Lord shall wash away the 
Is. 4, 4. 



The Water conveys one gift, the Spirit another. 33 

of His sons and daughters, by 1he Spirit of judgment 



by the Spirit of burning : He shall sprinkle clean water upon 
you, and ye shall be cleansed from all your sin. Angels in 
their choirs shall surround you, and shall say, Who is this Cant. 8, 
that cometh u}&gt; in ichite apparel, leaning on her near of kin? ^ 
For the soul that was before a servant, hath now professed 
her Master to be her kindred, and He, favourably allowing 
her sincere purpose, will cry out in response, Behold thou art Cant. 4, 
fair, my love; behold thou art fair ; thy teeth are as flocks 
of shorn sheep, because of her true-hearted confession ; and 
farther,^/// of them bearing twins, because of the twofold gift, 
that, I mean, perfected by water and the Spirit*, or that an 
nounced in the Old and the New Testaments. And may all of 
you, having finished the course of fasting, remembering what 
hath been said, bearing fruit in good works, standing blame 
less before the Invisible Bridegroom, obtain the remission of 
sins at God s hand : to whom be glory with the Son and the 
Holy Ghost, for ever. Amen. 

d The Fathers sometimes speak as if and the ordinary way of speaking on 

Baptism was primarily the Sacrament the subject ; Water, which conveys 

of remission of sins, and upon that came both gifts, is considered as a type of 

the gift of the Spirit, which notwith- one especially, conveys both remission 

standing was but begun in Baptism of sins through Christ s blood and the 

and completed in Confirmation. Vid. grace of the Spirit, but is the type of 

Tertullian. de Bapt. 7. 8. supr. i. 5 fin. one, viz. the blood of Christ, as the Oil 

Hence, as in the text, Baptism may be in Confirmation is of the other. And 

said to be made up of two gifts, "Water again, remission of sins is a complete 

which is Christ s blood, and the Spirit, gift given at once, sanctification an in- 

There is no real difference between this creasing one. 



LECTURE IV. 

ON THE TEN POINTS OF FATTH . 



Ct)LOSSIANS ii. 8. 

Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain 
deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the 
world, and not after Christ. 

LECT. 1. WICKEDNESS imitates goodness: and the tares strive to 

TV 

be taken for wheat, being like it in appearance, but detected 

2 Cor. in their taste by the discerning. Even the devil transformeth 
1 hi.inwh info &lt;in ait gel of light : not that he may reascend to 
where he was ; for being in heart like an anvil, incapable of 
all impression, he has now and for ever an impenitent will ; 
but that he may environ in the darkness of blindness, and 
amid the pestilence of unbelief, those who are living an 
Mat. 7, Angel s life. Many wolves are ranging about in sheep^s 
clothing, in the clothing, I say, of sheep, but with claws and 
fangs too. Enveloped in the skin of a gentle animal, and by 
their appearance deceiving the guileless, they shed on them 
from their jaws the deadly poison of impiety. Need have we 
then of Divine grace, and of an abstinent spirit, and of seeing 
eyes : lest eating tares as wheat, we out of ignorance come to 
harm ; lest taking the wolf for a sheep, we be made his prey; 
lest imagining the Devil, the Destroyer, to be an Angel of 
1 Pet. 5, mercy, we be devoured; for he goeth about like a roaring 
lion, seeking whom he may devour, according to the Scrip 
tures. For this cause the Church admonisheth ; for this 
cause are the present classes; for this, the reading of lessons. 

a This title is taken from Theodoret. enumeration is here made somewhat 
The number is variously made out. different both from that in Milles and 
Some MSS. say eleven for ten. An in the Benedictine Edd. 



Religion consists of doctrines and works. 35 

2. For the course of godliness is made up of these two ; (2.) 
pious doctrines, and good works : neither are the doctrines 
without good works acceptable to God ; nor arc works allow 
able works done apart from pious doctrines. For what boots 
it, to know excellently the doctrines concerning God, and 
to commit vile fornication ? or what again avails it to possess 
an excellent self-command, and to blaspheme impiously ? An 
exceeding great gain then is learning in doctrines; and we 
have need of sobrietv of mind, since many are they who would 

V *&gt; V 

spoil you through pkttoHOphy and rain deceit. And the Greeks Col. 2,8. 
by their smooth tongues draw you aside, for honey distils Prov. 5, 

o 

from fhc lips of a stranye woman; but they of the circum 
cision by means of the Holy Scriptures, which they miserably 
wrest from their meaning, deceive those who come to them, 
versed in them from childhood to age, and growing old in 
ignorance. And the sons of the Heretics, by good words and "Rom. 
j air speeches deceive the hearts of tlte simple, disguising with 
the name of Christ, as with honey, the envenomed darts of 
their irreligious doctrines: concerning all of whom together, 
the Lord saith, Beware lest any deceive yon. This gives Mat. 24, 
occasion to the teaching of the Faith, and expositions upon 4 * 
it 

3. But before making this tradition of the Faith, it seems 
to me fitting, to make at this time a short summary of neces 
sary doctrines: lest the multitude of things to be spoken, 
and the lengthening out of the sacred season of Lent, be 
too much for the memories of the more simple among you : 
and that having now strewn some seeds in a general way, 
we may retain the same things, when provided in a larger crop 
afterwards. And let those here who are more practised in 
these things, and have their senses now exercised to discern Hob. 5, 
both good and eril, bear with things rather fitted for children, 14&lt; 
and to a course (as it were) of milk : so that while they who H e b. 5, 
stand in need of Catechising receive benefit, they who have 13&gt; 
knowledge, may now freshen the remembrance of what they 
knew before. 

I. OF GOD. 

4. Lay then in your souls as a sure foundation the doctrine (3.) 
concerning God : That God is only one, unbegotten, unorigi- 

D 2 



36 God is One and Self dependent. . 

LECT. nated, unchangeable, unalterable : neither by another begotten, 

nor having another to succeed Him in His being : who neither 

began in time to be, nor shall ever have an end. And that 
He is also good and just: so that, if ever thou hear a heretic 
saying, that the Just God is one and the Good God another, 
being put on thy guard, thou mayest at once detect the 
poisoned dart of heresy. For some have dared impiously to 
divide the One God in their teaching h . Again, some have 
said that the Artificer and Lord of the soul was one, and of 
the body another", a doctrine at once absurd and blas- 
iv ii*y- phemous. For how should man become the one servant of 

*Vf Xl04C 

in Gmpei two masters, when the Lord saith in the Gospel, No man can 

MaT 6 serve two masters ? There is then One Only God, the Maker 

24. both of souls and bodies : there is One the Artificer of heaven 

and earth, the Maker both of Angels and Archangels, the 

Artificer of many things, but the Father of One only before 

the worlds, even of His One Only-begotten Son our Lord 

Job. i ,3- Jesus Christ, by whom He made all things, visible and invi- 

Col. 1, ., , 

16 . sidle. 

5. He, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is not confined 
Ps. 8, 3. to any place 41 ; nor is He less than the heavens: but the 
^2 4 heavens are the work of His fingers, and the iclwle earth 
is holden in the hollow of His hand. He is in and around 
all things. Think not that the sun is brighter than He, or is 
equal to Him : for He who formed the sun in the beginning, 
must needs be without comparison far greater and brighter. 
He foresees the future : He is mightier than all things : He 
knows all things, and does what He wills ; not subjected to 
antecedents or consequents, or to nativities, or chance, or 
fate; in all things perfect, and possessing in Himself the 
absolute form of every excellence ; neither waning, nor 
increasing, but in mode and circumstance ever the same ; 
who hath prepared chastisement for the sinners, and a crown 
for the righteous. 

(4.) 6. Seeing then that many have in divers ways gone astray 
from the One God, some having deified the sun, and so 
forsooth, when he went down, abiding during the night- season 

b This was the doctrine of Marcion, Hser. Ixvi. 8. 

Tren. iii. 25. . 2. 3. and the Manichees. d As the Manichees held. Theodor. 
e These were the Manichees. Epiph. Heer. i. 26. 



The Son in in all things like the Father. 37 

godless, others the moon, so as in the day-time to have no 
god, others, the other parts of the world, some, again, 
having deified the arts, others, meats, others, pleasures,- 
while some, mad after women, have set up on high the image 
of a naked woman, and calling it Venus, have bowed down 
to their own lusts, under the visible emblem, and others, 
dazzled by the brightness of gold, have deified that, and 
other portions of matter, seeing, I say, that these things are 
so, and that if one first stablish in his soul the doctrine of the 
One God, from whom are all things, and believe in it, he gels 
rid at once of all the multiplied evils of idolatry, and heretical 
error, do thou first settle firmly this doctrine of godliness in 
thy soul, by means of faith. 

OF CHRIST. 

7. Believe also in the Son of God, One and Only, our Lord 
Jesus Christ: God of God begotten: Life of Life begotten: 
Light of Light begotten: like in all things 6 to Him that 
begat Him : who began not His existence in time, but was 
before all ages eternally and incomprehensibly begotten of 
the Father: who is God s Wisdom and Power, and Righte 
ousness personally subsisting: who before all ages is set 
down at the right hand of the Father. Not that He 
received the throne on God s right hand, as some have 
thought, by reason of His patient suffering merely, being 
after His passion crowned as it were by God; but all the 
time He hath been in being, which is from an everlasting 
generation, He hath the Kingly prerogative, sitting together 
with the Father, being God, and Wisdom, and Power, as 
hath been shewn; together with the Father reigning, and by 
reason of the Father being the Artificer of all things; wanting 
nothing to the dignity of Godhead, and knowing His Father, 
even as He is known by His Father, and, to speak briefly, *&gt; y 
remember what is written in the Gospel, None knowetli 

Son, but the Father; neither knoiceth any the Father, 
the /Son. 

8. And neither do thou separate the Son from the Father, 
nor by confusing them together believe that the Son is the 

e Tav o ftau* Kctro. VO.VTU.. This was opposed to the oftaovfioi of orthodoxy, 
one of the symbols i.f the Semiarians, a* and the aiefAiM of Arianism. 






38 Christ is in one Person loth God and Man. 

LECT. Father r . But believe that of One God is One Only-begotten 
- : Son, who was before all ages. God the Word: the Word, not 

oi- 

uttered externally and dispersed abroad in the air, nor like to 
words impersonal g , but the Word, the Son, the Maker of all 
who have the Word, the Word who hears the Father and 
Himself speak. And of these things we will speak more at 
large in due season, if God permit : for we do not forget our 
purpose, that at present we are but introducing the Faith 
after the manner of a summary. 

III. OF His INCARNATION. 
His*Birth of the Virgin. 

9. And believe that He, the Only-begotten Son of God, for 
our sins came down from heaven to the earth, having taken a 
- manhood of like feelings with us, and being bom of the 
Holy Virgin and the Holy Ghost, not in appearance or 
imagination 1 , but in truth: nor did He pass through the 
$&lt;a ffu . Virgin as through a channel ; but truly took flesh of her, and 
of her was truly nourished with milk, and truly ate as we do, 
and truly drank as we do : for if the Incarnation was a phan 
tom, salvation likewise is a phantom. Christ was twofold, 
Man in what was seen, God in what was not seen : eating 
truly as Man like us, (for He had like feelings of the flesh with 
us,) but feeding with five loaves the five thousand as God: 
dying as Man truly, but as God raising him who had been 
four days dead : sleeping in the ship truly as Man, and walking 
on the waters as God. 



His Cross. 

(7.) 10. He was crucified for our sins truly: shouldest thou be 
disposed to deny it, the very place which all can see refutes 
thee, even this blessed Golgotha k , in which, on account of 



5t/va&gt;.o/0} igyuffxpivof tie KBIT 0^0.1 * This was the doctrine of the Valen- 

vffris. These were Noetus,Sabellius, tinians. Vid. Iren. Hser. i. 1. . 13. 

&c. Vid. Theodor. Hsr. iii. 3. Athan. k The spot where our Lord was cruci- 

Orat. iv. 2. fied and buried had been hidden by an 

8 The followers of Paul of Samosata, artificial mound, and desecrated by a 

and of Marcellus of Anyyra. Euseb. statue of Venus. Constantine cleared 

Eccles. Theol. ii. 11. 15. Concil. Sir- the ground, and his mother Helena built 

miens. A.D. 357- (Hard. vol. i. p. 703.) a church there. Euseb. Vit. Const, iii. 

h The heretics here alluded to, were, 25, 26. 
from their tenet, called Doceter. 



Christ descended into hell to deliver the Old Fathers. 39 

Him \vh&lt;&gt; was crucified on it, we are now assembled: and 
further, the whole world is filled with the portions of the wood 
of the Cross 1 . But He was crucified, not for sins of His, but 
that we might be freed from our own sins. And though He 
was (U-spised of men and beaten as a man, yet He was ac 
knowledged by the creature as God; for the sun, beholding 
his Lord outraged, hid his light in trembling, not enduring 
the sight. 

His Burial. 

11. He was laid truly as man in a tomb of rock, but the 
rocks burst asunder through fear because of Him. He de 
scended to the regions beneath the earth, that from thence 
also He might redeem the just m . For wouldest thou, I pray, 
that the living should enjoy His grace, and that, being most 
of them unholy; and that those who from Adam had been 

f * 

imprisoned long while, should not now obtain deliverance ? 
The prophet Esaias heralded with a loud voice so many 
things concerning Him: and wouldest thou not that the 
King should descend and rescue His herald ? David was 
there, and Samuel, and all the Prophets, and John himself, 
who said by his messenger, Art thou He that should come, or Mat. 11, 
do we look for another / Wouldest thou not that He should 3 
descend and rescue such as these ? 

His Resurrection. 

12. But He who descended to the regions beneath the (9.) 
earth, again ascended thence, and Jesus who was buried, rose 
again truly on the third day. And should the Jews ever 
harass you, meet them quickly by asking thus: Did Jonas 
after three days come forth from the whale, and hath not 
Christ then after three davs risen from the earth ? Was the 



dead man raised who touched the bones of Kliseus, and shall 
not the Maker of men much more easily be raised by the 

I Vid.alsoCattrh. x. 19.xiii.4.Helena the subject; and Constantine, in his 

is said to have discovered the true Cross Epistle written to Macarius, Bishop of 

on the occasion mentioned in the last Jerusalem, on the subject of the dist-o- 

note. The account is contained in Socr. very of the Holy Sepulchre. Euseb. Vit. 

Hist. i.l/.Soz. Hist.ii. 1. Theodor. i. 18. ii . 30. 

Ambros. in Ob. Theod. 45 c. Chrysosr. m Vid. Euseb. Dem. Evang. x.p. oOl. 

in Joan. 8.5. 1. besides Rufinus and Pau- Hieronym. in Eccles. ix. 10. &c. 
limi.. Eusebius is altogether silent on 



40 Virtue of the Xame of Christ and of the s ujn of His cross. 

LECT. power of the Father ? He rose then truly ; and being risen, 
He was again seen by His disciples. And the Twelve dis 
ciples were witnesses of His resurrection ; not witnessing 
with flattering words, but striving for the truth of the resur- 
Dcut. rection even to tortures and deaths. Further, at the mouth 

19 15 

of two or iltree witnesses shall every word be established, 
according to the Scriptures ; but twelve bear witness to 
Christ s resurrection, and disbelievest thou yet concerning 
the resurrection ? 

His Ascension. 

(10.) 13. And Jesus having finished His race of patience, and 
having redeemed men from their sins, ascended again into 
the heavens, a cloud receiving Him : and Angels stood by 
as He went up, and Apostles gazed. But if any doubt what 
he hears, let him believe the power of what he now sees. All 
kings when they die, have their power extinguished with 
their life: but Christ after being crucified, is worshipped by 
the whole world. We proclaim the Crucified, and the devils 
tremble ; yet many others have in course of time been cruci 
fied, but when has the invocation of any one of these scared 
away the devils ? 

14. Let us not then be ashamed of the Cross of Christ; but 
though another hide it, do thou openly seal it on thy brow n : 
that the devils beholding that princely Sign, may flee far 
away trembling. But make thou this Sign, when thou eatest 
and dririkest, sittest or liest down, risest up, speakest, 
walkest : in a word, on every occasion : for He who was 
here crucified, is above in the heavens. For if, when crucified 
and buried, He had remained in the tomb, then we had had 
shame: but now He who was crucified on this Golgotha, 
hath from the Mount of Olives on the East ascended into 
heaven: for having hence descended into hell, and come 
back again to us, from us did He ascend again into heaven, 

Ps. no, His Father addressing Him and saying, Sit thou on my right 
hand 9 until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool. 

n Vid. Tertull. de Cor. 3. Cyprian, dor. Aug. de Cat. rud. 34. (20.) 
de Laps. p. 181. Hier. Ep. 1. ad Helio- 



The IMij Ghost deifieth man. 41 

IV. OF THE FUTURE JUDGMENT. 

15. This Jesus Christ who hath ascended, cometh again (11.) 
from heaven, not from earth. And I say, not from earth, 
because many Antichrists are now to come from earth ; for, 

as thou hast seen, many have already begun to say, / am Mat. 24, 
Christ : and besides there is to come the Abomination of 5 ] 
Desolation, usurping the name of Christ. But do thou look 
for the true Christ, the Son of God, the Only-begotten, who 
is henceforth to come not from the earth, but from heaven, 
appearing to all more bright than any lightning or other 
brilliance, with Angels for His guards, that He may judge 
quick and dead, and reign with a kingdom, heavenly, eternal, 
and without end. Be sure to settle your belief in this point 
also, since there are many who say that Christ s kingdom 
has an end . 

V. OF THE HOLY GHOST. 

16. Believe also on the Holy Ghost, and hold concerning (12.) 
Him the same opinion which has been delivered to thee to 
hold concerning the Father and the Son : and not according 

to those who teach blasphemous things of Him p . But do thou 
learn that this Holy Ghost is One, indivisible, of manifold 
power ; working many things, yet Himself without parts ; 
who knovveth mysteries, who searcheth all things, even the } COT. 2, 
deep things of God; who descended on our Lord Jesus 10 
Christ in the form of a dove; who wrought in the Law and 
the Prophets : who, even now, at the season of Baptism 
sealeth thy soul ; of whose holiness every intellectual nature 
hath also need ; against whom if a man dare to blaspheme, 
he hath no forgiveness, either in this world, or in that which Mat. 12, 

*}&gt; 

is to come; who with the Father and the Son is exalted 
with the glory of the Godhead ; of whom Thrones also, and 
Dominions, Principalities and Powers, stand in need. For 
there is One God, the Father of Christ ; and One Lord Jesus 
Christ, of the Only God the Only-begotten Son : and One 
Holy Ghost, who halloweth and deifieth all, who spake 
the Law and the Prophets, both in the Old and New 
Testaments. 

Viz. the followers of Marcellus of P e. p. the Mnntunists, Arians, and 
Ancvra. Macedonians. 



reiov. 



42 Nothing not taught and proved out cf Scripture is of the Faith. 

LECT. 17. This seal have thou ever on thy mind; which now by 

IV 
way of summary has been touched on in its heads, and if the 



Lord grant, shall hereafter be set forth according to our 
power, with Scripture-proofs. For concerning the divine 
and sacred Mysteries of the Faith, we ought not to deliver 
even the most casual remark without the Holy Scriptures: 
nor be drawn aside by mere probabilities and the arti 
fices of argument. Do not then believe me because I tell 
thee these things, unless thou receive from the Holy Scrip 
tures the proof of what is set forth : for this salvation, which 
is of our faith, is not by ingenious reasonings, but by proof 
from the Holy Scriptures. 

VI. OF THE SOUL. 

(13.) 18. After knowing this venerable and glorious and most 
holy Faith, next thou hast to know thyself: know that thou 
art a twofold man consisting of soul and body, and that, as 
was said a little before, the same God is the Artificer both of 
vrigv- the soul and of the body. And know thou hast a soul pos 
sessed of freedom* 1 , the fairest work of God, made after the 
image of Him who formed it : immortal because of God who 
has made it immortal : a living thing, reasonable, undecay- 
ing, because of Him who hath bestowed these gifts : having 
power to do what it willelh. For it is not according to thy 
nativity that thou sinnest, nor is thy fornication according to 
thy fortune, nor, as some idly talk, do the conjunctions of the 
stars force thee to live in lasciviousness. \Vhv, to avoid con- 

9 

fession of thy wretchedness, dost thou blame the guiltless 

stars? Henceforth have nothing to do with astrologers: for 

Is. 47, of these saith the divine Scripture, Let noic ihe astrologers 

4t stand up and save thee, 8$c. Behold they shall be as stubble : 

the Jire shall burn them : they shall not deliver themselves 

from the power of the flame. 

19. And learn this also; that before the soul be come into 
the world, it hath in nothing sinned : but that having come 
into the world sinless , we now of our own choice sin. 

1 When Cyril and other writers speak r It was both a Pythagorean and an 
so pointedly about the freedom of the heretical doctrine, that the soul had sin- 
will, it is by way of protest against the ned in some preexistent state. Clem. 
Manichee.s and others who were fatalists. Strom, iii. 3. Iren. Hser. i. 25. 



The soul is responsible because it is free. 



4U 



Listen not, I pray thee, to any one perversely expounding 

the Scripture, [f then I do that which I would not, and the Rom. 7, 

rest: but remember Him who says, // ye be willing 



, yc shall eat the good of the land ; but if ye refuse 20. 
and rebel, yc shall be devoured u ith the .word, and the rest : 
and again, As ye have yielded your m mbe.-s servants of un- Rom. 6, 
cleanness and of iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield 
yuur members servants to righteousness unto holiness. Re 
member also the Scripture which says, And as they did not Rom. l, 
like to retain God in their knowledge, and, That which may 



"" _ 

rou 



be knou-n of God is manifest in them : and, Their eyes have 19. 
they closed. Remember too how God says against them, Yet* 1 *- 1 
I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed; /i0M&gt;j er . 2, 
then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange^- 
fine unto Me ? 

20. The soul is immortal; and all souls are alike, both of (14.) 
men and women; only there is a difference of person s . 

* _ 

There is not one order of souls 1 which by nature sin, and 
another order of souls which by nature act righteously, but 
both act from choice, the essence of the soul being one in 
kind and alike in all. 

Now I know that I am speaking at length, and that the 
time is far advanced : but what is preferable to salvation ? 
Dost thou not care, though with trouble, to take provision for 
the way against the heretics ? wilt thou not be told the turns 
of the road, lest out of ignorance thou fall down a precipice ? 
If thy teachers think it no small gain for thee to learn these 
things, shouldest rot thou, the learner, receive gladly the 
multitude of the things told thee ? 

21. The soul has freedom; and though the devil can 
tempt, he is not free to force it against deliberate choice. 
He suggests to thee the thought of fornication ; if thou wilt, 
iliou hast admitted it; if thou wilt not, thou hast not. For 
if thou wert a fornicator by necessity, then wherefore did God 
prepare hell ? If thou did justly by nature and not by choice, 
wherefore hath God prepared crowns of glory ineffable? The 
sheep is meek, yet it hath never been crowned for its meek- 



The doctrine of Apelles is here aimed * Some of the Gnostic sect? seem re 
nt. Vid. Tertull. de Anim. 36. t erred to. Vid. Iren. i. 24. 



44 The Body not the real cause of sin. 

LECT. ness; because its meekness belongs to it, not from choice, but 
by nature. 

VII. OF THE BODY. 

(15.) 22. Thou hast been taught, beloved, for the present, con 
cerning the Soul : now receive, as far as may be, the doctrine 
concerning the Body. Endure not any of those who say, 
that the body belongs not to God 11 : for they who hold this, 
and that the soul dwells in it as in a vessel which belongeth 

n 

not to itself, readily abuse it to fornication. But for what 
have they condemned this wonderful body ? in comeliness 
what lack has it ? And what is there of its fashioning not 
wrought with art ? Ought they not to have considered how 
bright the eyes are ; and how the ears placed obliquely receive 
sounds without hindrance ; and how the sense of smell is 
discriminating in scents, and eagerly discerns incense; and 
how the tongue is the minister of two things, the faculty of 
tasting, and the power of speech ? And how the lungs, placed 
out of sight, are unceasingly occupied in respiring air ? Who 
gave the heart its unremitted beating? Who divided so 
many veins and arteries ? Who skilfully interwove the 
bones with the muscles ? Who while assigning a part of our 
food for our substance, separated the rest in a seemly manner; 
and hath hidden our uncomely members in a more comely 
disposition ? Who, when mankind was like to have failed, 
rendered it by a simple fellowship perpetual ? 

(16.) 23. Say not, I pray, that the body is the cause of sin. For 
if the body be the cause of sin, how is it that a corpse is 
without sin ? Put a sword in the right hand of one just dead, 
and there is no murder committed ; let beauty of every sort 
pass before the young just dead, yet is no impure desire 
excited. Why ? Because it is not the body which sins of 
itself, but the soul by means of the body. The body is the 
instrument, and as it were the garment and robe of the soul ; 
if then it be abandoned by the soul to fornication, it becomes 
unclean; but if it dwell with a holy soul, it becomes the 
temple of the Holy Ghost. It is not I who say this, but 
1 Cor. 6, Paul the Apostle hath said; Know ye not that your bodies are 
the temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in yon. Be tender 

u This was the doctrine of Gnostics and Manichees. 



Unmarried persons must not despise the married. 45 

then of thy body, as being the temple of the Holy Ghost; 
sully not thy flesh with fornication ; defile not this thy fairest 
robe ; but if thou hast defiled it, cleanse it now through 
penitence ; while the time allows, wash it. 

"24. Arid as to the doctrine of chastity, above all, let 
the order of Solitaries and of Virgins attend to it, who are 
establishing in the world an Angelic life; and then, the rest 
of the Church s people also. Great is the crown laid up for 
you, brethren ; for a poor indulgence barter not a high 
dignity. Listen to the Apostle, saying, Lest there be anyHeb. 12, 
fornicator, or profane person as Esau, who for one morsel of 
meat sold his birthright. Having been enrolled in the An 
gelical books for thy purpose of chastity, beware lest thou be 
blotted out again for thy deed of fornication. 

25. Nor again on the other hand, while observing chastity, 
be thou puffed up against those who choose the humbler path 

of wedlock. Far marriage is honourable, and the bed Mwefe-Heb,i3, 
filed, as saith the Apostle. Thou too who keepest thy 4 
purity, wert thou not born of married persons ? Do not, 
because thou hast a possession of gold, set at nought the 
silver. But let those also who are married be of good cheer, 
who use marriage lawfully ; who subject their marriage to 
laws, not making it wanton by unbounded licence ; who 
observe seasons of abstinence, that they may give themselves l Cor. 
unto prayer ; who with pure garments bring their bodies also c 
pure to the assemblies of the Church ; who have entered into 
the state of matrimony, not for indulgence, but that they mayS/T* 
have a home. w 

N4*. 

26. And let not those who have been but once married, set 
at nought them who have involved themselves in a second 
marriage*. Continence is indeed a noble thing and an ad 
mirable ; yet we should make allowance for a second mar 
riage, that the weak may not commit fornication. It is good l Cor. 

for than if they abide even as 7, saith the Apostle ; but if 
they cannot con fain, let them marry ; it is better to marry 
than to bum. But every thing else, be it put away far from 

* The Montanists condemned second were an impediment to holy orders, 

marriages; vid.Tertull.deMonogam. 8; They are spoken of by the Fathers as 

de Exhort. Cast. 9. and the Novatians, at best a concession, e.g. Iren. Haer. iii. 

Epiph. Haer. lix. 3. Second marriages 17. Chryso.st. in Mat. Horn. 32. fin. 



4(&gt; Those who fast must not condemn those who c 

LECT. you, fornication, adultery, and every form of incontinence ; 

-and let the body be kept for the Lord, that the Lord also may 

look upon the body. And let the body be nourished with 

meats, that it may live, and serve without hindrance ; but not 

that it may be given up to indulgence. 

.1 feats. 

(17.) 27. And concerning food, let these be your doctrines; 
since many stumble concerning meats also. For some in 
differently draw near to things sacrificed to idols; and others, 
while they are austere, condemn them who eat : and thus in 
different ways the soul* of some is defiled in the matter of 
meats, while they are ignorant of the profitable reasons, for 
eating or abstaining. For we fast, abstaining from wine and 
flesh, not because we abhor them as abominations, but be 
cause we look for the reward ; that scorning things sensible, 
Ps. 126, we may enjoy the spiritual and invisible table, and that 
MH iHff now hi tears, ire way reajt in joy in the world to 
come. Despise not however those who eat, and partake 

l Tim. because of their bodies weakness ; nor blame those who 

5 23 

//.sv? a little wifte, for their stomach s sake, and their often 

infirmities ; nor condemn them as sinners. Nor abhor thou 

flesh as being an unchristian thing ; for the Apostle knew 

1 Tim. some such when he spake of those, forbidding to marry, 

and commanding to abstain from meats which God hath 

created to be received with Ihanksgir utg of them which 

believe*. In abstaining then from them, abstain not from 

them as abominable, otherwise thou hast no reward ; but 

look down on them though good, for the sake of those 

nobler spiritual things which are set before thee. 

28. For thy soul s sake, at no time eat ought of the things 
offered to idols. For concerning these meats, not I only, but 
the Apostles also before now, and James, the Bishop of this 
Church, have taken thought: and the Apostles and Elders 
write to all the Gentiles a Catholic Epistle, bidding them 

7 The various sects of Gnostics, and abstain from marriage, flesh, and wine, 

the Manichees, considered certain meats not for discipline (J/ aexvffiv) but as ab- 

and drinks, as flesh and wine, to be pol- horring them, forgetting that they are all 

luting. Vid. Iren. Hser. i. 28. Clem, very good, &c. and speaking blasphemy 

Psed. ii. 2. p. 186. Epiph. Hser. xlvi. 2. against the creation, let him amend or 

xlvii. 1. &c. &c. August. Haer. 46. vid. be deposed &c." 
Canon. Apost. 43. " If any Bishop &c. 



The Resurrection as easij as maldny Moses rod a serjienf. 47 

abstain, chiefly from things sacrificed to idols, and then 
from blood also and things strangled. For many men being 
of a savage nature, and living like drgs, both lap up blood, 
copying the way of the most savrge wild beasts; and also 
eat greedily without scruple things strangled 1 . But do thon, 
tlif servant of Christ, when eating, observe to eat with 
reverence. Thus much concerning meats. 

Apparel. 

29. Be thou clad with plain apparel, not for vain orna- (18.) 
merit s sake, but for a necessary covering; nor to make a 
display, but that thou mayest be warm in winter, and mayest 
hide thine uncomeliness. Beware lest, under colour of hiding 
thine uncomeliness, by thy extravagant robes thou fall into 
uncomeliness of another sort. 

VIII. OF THE RESURRECTION. 

30. Be tender, I beseech thee, of this body; and know (19.) 
that thou shalt arise from the dead, to be judged with this 
body. But if any thought of unbelief steal upon thee, as 
though the thing were impossible, consider from thine own 

the things which appear not. For tell me; think where 
thou wert thyself, an hundred or more years ago? From what 
an element, from what a very small and mean substance, hast 
thou come to so great stature, and to such dignity of comeli 
ness. Cannot then He who brought into being that which 
was not, raise up again that which has been and has decayed? 
He who year by year raises up the corn which we sow, when 
it is dead, shall lie find difficulty in raising us up, for whose 
sakes He was raised Himself? Thou seest how the trees 
have stood now for so many months fruitless and leafless; 
but when the winter is passed, they revive in all their parts 
as it were from the dead. Shall not we then much rather, 
yea and much more easily, live again ? The rod of Moses 
was by the counsel of God changed into the dissimilar nature 
of a serpent: and shall not man who has fallen into death 
be again restored to himself? 

z The prohibition of idol-sacrifices, regards blood, and things strangled, it 
blood, and things strangled, was long in had become almost obsolete by S.Austin s 
in the East; but in the West as age. Contr. Faust, xxxii. 13. 



48 The Canon of Scripture to be received from the Church. 

LECT. 31. Heed not them who say that this body is not raised: 
for it is raised: and Esaias testifieth this, saying, 77/6? dead 



1 Q f~* 

19. Sept. ?/?// arise, and they in the tombs shall be raised. So Daniel, 
Dan. 12, Many of Ihem that sleep in the dust of the earth shall arise ; 
some to everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame. But 
though the resurrection is common to all men, it is not alike 
to all; for we all indeed receive everlasting bodies, but not 
all the same bodies. For the just receive them, that through 
eternity, they may join the Choirs of Angels; but the sinners, 
that they may undergo for everlasting the torment of their sins. 

IX. OF THE HOLY LAYER. 

32. Wherefore, the Lord of His lovingkindness has been be 
forehand with us, giving us the repentance of the Laver, that 
having cast away the chief, yea rather the whole burden of 
our sins, and having received the seal of the Holy Ghost, we 
may become heirs of life eternal. But seeing that we have 
before spoken sufficiently of the Laver of Baptism, let us go 
on to what remains of our preparatory teaching. 

X. OF THE DIVINE SCRIPTURES. 

(20.) 33. These things are taught us by the inspired Scriptures, 
both of the Old and of the New Testament. For the God of 
both Testaments is one, by whom Christ who appeared in the 
New Testament, was foretold in the Old ; who through the 
Law and the Prophets brought us as a Schoolmaster to 
Gal. 3, Christ. For before faith came, we were kept under the Law: 
4 * and, The Lan- teas our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ. 
And if ever thou hear any of the heretics blaspheming the 
Law or the Prophets, utter against them the saving voice, 
Mat. 5, saying, Jesus came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfil. 
Learn, also, diligently, and from the Church, which are the 
books of the Old Testament, and which of the New : and 
v- read not, I pray, any of the uncertain books 8 . For why 
sliouldest thou, who knowest not those which are acknow 
ledged by all, take needless trouble about those which are 



a Or apocryphal, a word which did name of avay/v^oW^tva* or Ecclesiastical 

not convey any reproach in the early is given by some writers to certain works 

Church, but merely signified that the which were held in reverence, and so 

book so named was not in the canon, read in churches, but not inspired. Vid. 

Yid. Pearson, Vind. Ignat. i. 4. The Milles in loc. p. 65. 



Y The history of t tie Septiiagint Version. 49 

questioned? Read the Holy Scriptures, these two and 
twenty books of the Old Testament, which were interpreted 
bv the seventy-two interpreters. 

34. For b after the death of Alexander the king of the (21.) 
Macedonians, and the division of his kingdom into four prin 
cipalities, into Babylonia, and Macedonia, and Asia, and 
Egypt, one of the kings of Egypt, Ptolemy Philadelphus, a 
king very fond of learning, when he was collecting the books 
which were in every place, heard from Demetrius of Phale- 
ruiu, who was over the library, concerning the Divine Scrip 
tures of the Law and the Prophets, and judging it far better 
to abstain from getting the books by force from unwilling 
persons, but rather to conciliate their possessors by presents 
and friendship, knowing moreover, that what is forced from 
men, being given against their choice, is oftentimes tampered 
with, whereas that which is given of free choice is presented 
with all sincerity, he sent exceeding many gifts to Eleazar 
the priest at that time, for the temple at Jerusalem, and caused 
to be sent to him six men out of each of the twelve tribes of 
Israel, for the work of interpretation. Then, to prove whether 
the books were divine or no, and to prevent them who had 
been sent from combining together among themselves, he 
assigned to each of the interpreters his several dwelling, in 
the place called Pharos, which adjoins Alexandria, and bade 
each translate all the Scriptures. And when they had accom 
plished the work in seventy-two days, he brought together the 
translations of all, which they had made in different cells 



b This account is also found in Euseb. inspired writers of the New Testament 
Praep.Evang. viii.l 5. Philon. vit. Mos. evince towards it. e.g. Acts xiii. 34. 
ii.658. Joseph. Antiq.xii. 2. Justin. Apol. xv. 17. We may believe this doctrine, 
1. . 31. p. 62. Iren. Hist. iii. 25. Clem, and yet with entire consistency reject the 
Strom, p. 342. These, to which may be particular story which symbolizes, and 
added Hilary, Austin, and Philastrius, got currency by, the primitive belief in it. 
are in addition to Aristeas, who is the Prideaux (Connect, partii.b. 1.) comes to 
original authority. Epiphanius makes the following conclusions : thatthebook 
the same general statement with some which goes under the name of Aristeas, 
further particulars in detail. This con- nay of Aristobulus, is a forgery of some 
cordant testimony of the Fathers does not Hellenistic Jew, with a view to add 
prove the fact alleged, which seems to honour to the Septuagint version ; and 
have come from the Jews, yet may prove that in reality that version was gradually 
the doctrine implied and involve din it, that made in successive ages, first as far as 
there is something, more than ordinary, the Law, then the Prophets, &c. It 
of the Divine Hand in the Translation in should be observed, that S. Jerome re- 
question, a doctrine which is confirmed jects the history of the separate Cells 
by the deference and reliance which the with great contempt. Praef. ad Pentat. 



50 Hooks tlmt compose the Canon of Scripture. 

LECT. without approaching one another ; and he found them agree- 
1 ing not in sense only, but in words. For the matter was not 
one of witty invention, or a contrivance of man s cunning 
devices ; but the interpretation of the Divine Scriptures, 
spoken by the Holy Ghost, was, of the Holy Ghost, accom 
plished. 

(22.) 35. Read the two and twenty books of these Scriptures: 
and have nothing to do with the uncertain books. Those only 
study earnestly, which we read confidently even in church. 
Far wiser than thou, and more devout, were the Apostles, and 
- the ancient Bishops, the rulers of the Church, who have 

Justin 1 , handed down these: ttiou, therefore, who art a child of the 

AP L Church, trench not on their sanctions. And of the Old Testa 
ment, as hath been said, study the two and twenty books; 
and these, if thou art diligent, strive to remember by name, 
as I repeat them. Of the Law, are the first five books of 
Moses; Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy: 
then Joshua the son of Nun: and the book of Judges and of 
Ruth, which is numbered the seventh. Of the remaining 
Historical books, the first and second books of Kings are 
among the Hebrews one book, and so the third and fourth 
books; and likewise the first and second books of Chronicles 
make one book ; and the first and second books of Esdras are 
one; and the twelfth is the book of Esther: these are the Histo 
rical books. The books which are written in verses are five ; 
Job, and the book of Psalms, and Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes, 
and the Song of Songs, which is the seventeenth book. After 
these come the five Prophetic books: the one book of the 
Twelve Prophets; the book of Esaias ; the book of Jeremias, 
which with Baruch, the Lamentations, and the Epistle makes 
one book ; then Ezekiel ; and the book of Daniel is the 
twenty-second book of the Old Testament. 

36. Of the New Testament, there are only the four Gospels : 

^/3W- the rest are forged and mischievous. The Manichaeans also 
wrote a Gospel according to Thomas, which made acceptable 
with the fragrance of the evangelic name, corrupts the souls of 
the simpler sort. And receive also the Acts of the Twelve 
Apostles: and in addition to these, the seven Catholic Epistles, 
of James and Peter and John and Jude : and the final seal 
of all, and the last work of the disciples, the fourteen Epistles 



l*r&lt;n-tir&lt;d iruniinx. 51 



of Paul . But all the rest, let them be put aside into the 
second j*ank ; and what is not read in the churches, that 
read not by thyself, according as thou hast heard. Thus far 
of these things. 

37. Fly also from every devilish work, and listen not to (23.) 
that apostate Serpent, who has of his own choice changed 
himself from a good nature; who can persuade those \vho 
are willing, but can force no one. And give heed neither 
to observations of the stars, nor to auguries, nor to omens, 
nor to the fabulous divinations of the Greeks. And sorcery, 
and the craft of charms, and their most wicked practices for 
calling up the dead, receive not even to listen to them. 
Stand aloof from every sort of intemperance, being neither a 
glutton, nor a lover of pleasure ; raised above all covetous- 
ness, and the taking of usury. Nor throw thyself into the 
assemblies of the heathen spectacles : nor ever use amulets 
in thy sicknesses : and put away from thee also the pollution 
of tavern-haunting. And fall not into Judaism, nor into the 
sect of the Samaritans : for henceforth hath Jesus Christ ran 
somed thee. Abstain from all observance of Sabbaths, and 
from calling any indifferent meat " common or unclean." 
Especially abhor all the assemblies of wicked heretics : and 
in every way make thine own soul safe, by fastings, by 
prayers, by alms, by reading of the divine oracles: that 
living in soberness and godly doctrine for the rest of thy time 
in the flesh, thou mayest enjoy the one salvation of the 
Laver, and having been thus listed in the heavenly hosts by 
God and the Father, thou mayest also be counted worthy of 
the heavenly crown, in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be 
glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

c S. Cyril keeps silence about the note 9.) as the Latins with respect to 
Apocalypse, after the usage of the early the Epistle to the Hebrews. 
Greek Church (vid. Tillemont S. John, 



E 2 



LECTURE V, 

ON 7 FAITH*. 



HEBREWS xi. 1, 2. 

Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of 
things not seen : for by it the elders obtained a good report. 

LECT. 1. How great the dignity is which the Lord bestows on 
- you, in transferring you from the order of Catechumens to 



that of the Faithful, Paul the Apostle sets before you, saying, 
1 Cor. 1, God is Faithful, by whom ye were called to the fellowship of 

His Son Jesus Christ. For as God is called Faithful, thou 

likewise receivest this title, receiving in it a great dignity. 

For as God is called Good, Just, Almighty, the Artificer of 
Vid. In- the Universe, so also He is called Faithful; think then to 
Lp t * how great a dignity thou art rising, being on the eve of 
6. sharing a title of God. 

2. Now then it is only required, that a man be found 
Prov.20, among you faithful in his conscience : for a faithful man, 

saith Scripture, who can find? Not that thou shouldest shew 
l Cor. 4, thy conscience to me ; for thou art not to be judged of man s 

judgment; but that thou manifest to God a guileless faith, 
Ps. 7,9. who trieth the reins and the hearts, and knoweth the thoughts 

Ps. 94, of men. A faithful man is something great, and wealthier than 
11. 

a S. Cyril treats in this and five fol- crucified and buried (13) and rose from 

lowing Lectures of the following articles the dead the third day and ascended 

in succession, which make up the Creed into the heavens, and sat down at the 

of Jerusalem. " I believe" (Lecture 5) right hand of the Father (14) and is 

in one God (6) The Father (7) Al- coming to judge quick and dead (15) 

mighty (8) Maker of heaven and earth, And in the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, 

and of all things visible and invisible Who spake by the Prophets (16. 17) 

(9) And in One Lord Jesus Christ (10) and in One Holy Catholic Church, and 

the Only-begotten Son of God, begotten resurrection of the flesh, and in life ever- 

of the Father before all worlds, Very lasting (18). Milles in loc. also Ed. 

God by whom all things were made (11) Benedict, p. 84. 
Who was incarnate and made man (12) 



Exercise of faith in matters of this world. 53 

:inv wealthy. For to the faithful man belongs the whole Pmv.n, 
n-orld of riches, in that he thinks lightly of them, and tramples " 
tlu-m under foot. For those who in appearance are wealthy, 
and possess much, yet are poor in soul : for in proportion as 
they amass, do they pine from longing for what is still wanting. 
But the faithful man, most wondrously, in poverty is rich ; 
for knowing that we need only to have raiment and food, \ .Tim. 
and being content with these, he has put riches under foot. 

3. Nor is it only among us, who bear the title of Christ, (2.) 
that the dignity of faith is great: for likewise all that is 
accomplished in the world, even by those who are aliens from 

the Church, is accomplished by faith. By faith, marriage laws 
knit together persons unknown one to another : and one who 
is strange to us, through the faith placed in marriage compacts, 
becomes a sharer in strange persons and strange possessions. 
By faith is husbandry also upheld : for he who does not 
believe he shall receive a harvest, endures not its toils. By 
faith, sea-faring men, putting their trust in a very slender 
plank, exchange that most solid element the earth, for the 
unsteady motion of the waves; yielding themselves to uncer 
tain hopes, and carrying with them as something surer than any 
anchor, their faith. By faith then most affairs of men hold 
together: and this not among us only, but likewise among 
those who are without, as hath been said ; for though they 
receive not the Scriptures, but bring forward doctrines of 
their own, yet these also do they receive by faith. 

4. To that faith which is true, the lesson which was read to 
day likewise calls you, setting before you, how you also must 
please God; for, He saith, without faith it is impossible Heb. 11, 

/% 

to please Him. For when will a man set himself to serve 
God, unless he believes that He is a rewarder ? When will a 
young woman choose a virgin life, or a young man be sober- 
minded, unless they believe that chastity has a crown un 
fading ? Faith is the eye which enlightens the whole con 
science, and creates in it understanding ; for the Prophet 
saith, And if ye believe not, neither shall ye* understand. Is. 7, 9. 
Faith stops the mouths of lions, according to Daniel ; for the Sept&lt; 
Scripture saith concerning him, that Daniel teas taken up Dan. 6, 
out of the den, and no manner of hurt icas found upon him, 
because he believed in /it s d od. Is there aught more fearful 



54 The faith of Abraham. 

LECT. than the devil ? But even against him we have no other 

- weapon than faith, an impalpable buckler against an unseen 

foe. For he discharges manifold darts, and shoots in the 

darkness those who are not watching ; but, since the foe is 

unseen, we have, as a stout defence, faith, according to the 

Eph. 6, saying of the Apostle, Above //, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the 
wicked. For when, as oft-times happens, a fiery dart of 
desire of base indulgence is hurled by the devil, faith, shadow 
ing forth the judgment, cools the soul, and quenches it. 
(3.) 5. Now we have many things to say concerning faith, and 
the whole day would not suffice us discoursing of it : for the 
present be we content with Abraham alone, one of the ex 
amples of the Old Testament, seeing that w r e also are become 
his sons through faith. He was justified not only by works, 
but by faith also : and though he did many things well, yet 
was he never called the friend of God, except when he be 
lieved ; moreover every deed of his was perfected by faith. 
By faith he left his parents : by faith he abandoned country, 
dwelling-place, and home. As then he was justified, so be 
thou also justified. Further, his body was dead : for he was 
an old man, and his wife Sarah was old also, and no hope of 
children was left him. God promises offspring to the old 

Rom. 4, man : and Abraham, not being weak in faith, nor considering 
his own body now dead ; thinking not of his body s infirmity, 

Heb. 11, but of the power of Him who promised, and judging Him 
faithful who had promised, in a wondrous manner gained 
a child from bodies as good as dead. And when after he had 
gained a son, he was ordered to offer him, although he had 

Gen. 21, heard that, In Isaac shall thy seed be called, he offered his 
only-begotten son to God, believing that God was able even 
to raise him from the dead. So having bound his son, and 
laid him upon the wood, in intent he offered him, but by the 
goodness of God, who gave him a lamb instead of his child, 
he received his son alive. Wherefore, he being faithful, was 

Rom. 4, sealed unto righteousness, and received circumcision, the seal 
of the righteousness which he had yet being uncircumcised; 

Geu. 17, having received the promise that he should be the father of 
many nations. 

6. How then is Abraham the father of many nations ? Of 



4 *~ 



The jHHt rr of faith. 55 



tin.- J&lt; us he is confessedly, by the succession according to 
tlif flesh. But if we give heed to that which is according to 
the flesh, we shall be forced to say that the oracle is false: 
for according to the flesh he is no longer the father of us all ; 
but a faith, of which his is the type, makes us all sons of 
Abraham. I low and after what sort ? It is incredible among 
men, that one should arise from the dead ; it is incredible 
also, that of the aged, in their bodies dead, a child should be 
born ; yet when Christ is preached, as having been crucified 
on the tree, dead and risen again, we believe it. By likeness 
then of faith we come to the sonship of Abraham : and then, 
upon our faith, like him, we receive the spiritual seal : being 
circumcised by the Holy Ghost through the Sacred Laver, 
not in the uncircumcision of the body but of the heart, as 

/ 

Jeremias saith, Circumcise yourselves to the Lord, and tak 
utcntj the uHch cumcision of your heart ; and as the Apostle 
saith, by the circuntcision of Christ, buried with Him in Col. 2, 
baptism ; and the rest. 

7. This faith if we keep, we shall be clear of condemnation, (4.) 
and shall be adorned with virtues of every kind. For so 
great power hath faith, that it even gives buoyancy to men 

walking on the sea. Peter was a man like unto us, formed of Mat- 14 * 

. 29 

flesh and blood, and living upon like food: but believing Jesus, 

when He said, Come, he walked on the waters, having his 
faith for a support on the waters, surer than any foundation ; 
and his heavy body was kept afloat by the buoyancy of his 
faith. Hut though as long as he believed, he had a sure 
footing on the water ; yet as soon as he doubted, he began to 
sink : for as his faith gradually relaxed, his body also was 
carried along with it. And beholding his evil case, Jesus, 
the Corrector of the evils of our souls, said to him, O thou of 
Uttle faith, wherefore didst Ihou doubt? and again, nerved 
by 1 lim who took hold of his right hand, from the moment 
he believed again, being led by the hand of the Lord, he 
regained the same power of walking on the waters. For 
thus the Gospel hath indirectly recorded, in the words, when Mat. 14, 
tliaj /rent up into the ship. For it says not that Peter by 
s\\ miming went up into the ship ; but it gives us to under 
stand, that as far as he had gone to Jesus, such a distance did 
he retrace, going up again into the ship. 



o6 Faith of friends sometimes a substitute for personal faith. 

LECT. 8. Yea, so much power hath faith, that not only the person 
believing is saved, but one man has been saved by others 



(5 } 
Mark 2 believing. The palsied man at Capernaum was not faithful ; 

but they who bore him, and let him down through the tiles, 
believed ; for the soul of the sick man shared in the sickness 
of his body. Think not that I accuse him groundlessly ; for 

Mat. 9, the Gospel itself hath said, Jesus beholding, not, his faith, but 
their faith, saith to the sick of the palsy, Arise. The bearers 
believed, and the sick of the palsy enjoyed the blessing of the 
cure. 

9. Wouldest thou se^e yet more certainly, that some have 

John 11. been saved by others faith ? Lazarus died : one day passed, 
and a second and a third : his sinews were decayed, and cor 
ruption was now preying on his body. How could a man four 
days dead believe, and call to the deliverer on his own be 
half? But what was wanting in the dead, was supplied by 
his true sisters. For when the Lord came, his sister fell at 
His feet: and when to His question, 11 he re have ye laid 
him ? she answered, Lord, by this time he stinketh, for he 
hath been dead four days. He saith, If thou wilt believe, thou 
shall see the glory of God. As if saying, " Fill thou up 
what is wanting, for the faith of this dead ;" and so availed 
the sisters faith, that it recalled the dead from the gates of 
hell. Have men then, believing one for the other, availed for 
a resurrection from the dead, and shalt not thou, if thou 
believe sincerely concerning thyself, much rather be profited? 
Nay, though thou be faithless, or have but little faith, yet is 
the Lord merciful ; He will condescend to thee when thou 
repentest : only do thou also say to Him with a honest heart, 

Mark 9, Lord, I believe, help Thou in tie unbelief. And if thou think- 
est that thou art indeed faithful, but hast not yet attained the 
perfection of faith, thou hast need to say with the Apostles, 

Lukei7,Z0rd, increase our faith: for part thou hast of thine own 

self, but the much greater part thou receivest of Him. 
(6.) 10. For Faith, though in name one, is distinguished into 

vo oy ~. two kinds. For there is one sort of faith, which is of doc- 

ACtflXOlli 

trines, implying the acquiescence b of the mind concerning 

b That faith is an assent of the mind is maintained by Clement, Alex. Strom, 
to the truth, or a submission or acquies- lib. ii. p. 362. Basil in Psalm cxv. 
cence of the mind to a divine message, p. 371, 2. 



7 tro hinds of faith. 57 

certain thing: and this faith profits the soul, as the 
Lord saith, He that heareth my words, and believeth in Him John 5, 
that scut .1/6% hath everlasting life, and shall not come into 
condemnation: and again, He that believeth on the Son is not John 3, 

10 

condemned: but it patted from death into life. O the great " 
loving-kindness of God ! The righteous were many years 24. 
in pli Basing Him ; but what they obtained, by their pleasing 
Him well for many years, this is now bestowed on thee by 
Jesus in one hour. For if thou shalt believe that Jesus Christ 
is Lord, and that God hath raised Him from the dead, thou 
shalt be saved and translated into Paradise, by Him who 
brought the robber into Paradise. And do not disbelieve the 
possibility of this ; for He who in this holy Golgotha saved 
the robber in one hour, the same will also save thee when 
thou shalt believe. 

11. But there is a second sort of faith, bestowed as a gift 
by Christ in the way of grace. For to one is given by the 1 Cor. 
*)&gt;irit the word of icitidom, to another the word of knowledge " 
fty the xante Spirit; to another faith by the same Spirit, to 
another gifts of healing. Now this faith which is given of 
grace by the Spirit, is not only a faith in doctrine ; but it 
also worketh things beyond man s power. For he who hath 
this faith shall say to this mountain, Remove hence to yonderMai.il, 
ji/ace, and it shall remove. For when any one shall say this 20 " 
by faith, believing that it shall come to pass, and shall notMarkli, 
waver in his heart, then he receiveth the grace. And it is of 23 
this faith that it is said, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard Mat. 17, 
seed. For like as a grain of mustard seed is small in bulk, 20&lt; 
but fiery- in operation, and though sown in a narrow space, 
has a circuit of mighty branches, and being grown up is able 
even to shelter the fowls ; thus faith too accomplishes in the 
-oul, in the briefest moment, the greatest things. Illuminated 
by faith the soul hath visions of God, yea, and, as far as it 
may, beholds God: and ranges along the bounds of the uni- 
vi-rse, and before the end of this world, already gazes upon 
the judgment, and the giving of rewards that is promised. 
( herish then the faith in Him, which is of thyself ; that thou (7.) 
mayest also receive from Him that faith which works things 
above man s power. 

2. But take thou and hold that faith only as a learner and 



58 The Creed founded on Scripture. 

LKCT. in profession, which is by the Church delivered to thee, 
- - and is established from all Scripture. For since all cannot 
read the Scripture, but some as being unlearned, others by 
business, are hindered from the knowledge of them ; in 
order that the soul may not perish for lack of instruction, 
in the Articles which are few we comprehend the whole 
doctrine of the Faith. This I wish you to remember even 
in the very phrase, and to rehearse it with all diligence 
among yourselves, not writing it on paper, but by memory 
graving it on your heart as on a monument: being watch 
ful, during your exercise, lest haply some of the Cate 
chumens overhear the things delivered to you. This I 
wish you to keep all through your life as a provision for 
the way, and besides this to receive no other ever: 
whether we ourselves should change and contradict what 
2 Cor. we now teach ; or some opposing Angel, transformed into 
J an Angel of light, should aim at leading you astray. For 



8. 9. though ire, or (in Angel from heaven, preach any oilier Gospel 

ntito you titan that ye hare received, let him be accursed. 

And for the present, commit to memory the Faith, merely 

listening to the words; and expect at the fitting season 

the proof of each of its parts from ,the Divine Scrip 

tures. For the Articles of the Faith were not composed 

at the good pleasure of men : but the most important points 

chosen from all Scripture, make up the one teaching of the 

Faith. And, as the mustard seed in a little grain contains 

many branches, thus also this Faith, in a few words, hath 

enfolded in its bosom the whole knowledge of godliness 

(8.) contained both in the Old and New Testaments. Behold, 

2 Thess. therefore, brethren, and hold the traditions which ye now 

2 15&lt; receive, and write them on the table of your hearts*. 

3. 13. This keep with godly fear, lest haply any of you being 

puffed up, be spoiled by the enemy; lest some heretic pervert 

any of the things delivered unto you. For Faith is like 

casting down money on the table : and this we have now 

done ; but God requires of you an account of the deposit. 

1 Tim.5, / charge thee before God, saith the Apostle, who quickeneth 

6,13.14. fill things, and before Jesus Christ, who before Pontius Pilate 

ivitnessed a good confession, that ye keep this Faith delivered 

c The Nicene Creed follows here in some MSS. 



The Articles of Faith a deposit. 59 

unto thee without spot, until the appearing of our Lord 
./ V//.V Christ. The treasure of life hath now been committed 
to thee, and the Master will seek His deposit at His appear 
ing, which in His own time* He shall shew, Who is 7^1 Tim. 6, 

It -1 J 

blessed and only Pot en talc, the King of kings, and Lord of 
lords; }\ ho only hath immortality, dwelling in the light 
which no man can approach unto; WJiom no man hath seen, 
n&lt;&gt;r can see: to Whom be honour and glory for ever and 
ever. Amen. 



LECTURE VI. 

ON THE UNITY OF GOD*. 



ISAIAH xlv. 16, 17. 

They shall go to confusion together that are partakers of idols ; 
but Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salva 
tion, ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded ivorld without end. 

LECT. l. BLESSED be God and the Father of our Lord Jesus 
VI 

- Christ; and blessed also be His only-begotten Son. For in the 
1,3. idea of God, let the idea of Father be included; that glory 
may be ascribed indivisibly to Father and Son with the Holy 
Ghost. For there is not one glory to Father, arid another to 
Son, but one and the same with the Holy Ghost. Since the 
Son is the Only-begotten of the Father, and when the Father 
receives, the Son shares the glory ; for the Son s glory is from 
His Father s honour: arid again, when the Son is glorified, 
the Father of that infinitely good Gift is honoured mightily. 

2. Now, though the motions of the intellect are most rapid, 
yet the tongue requires words, and the medium of discussion 
drawn out at full length. For the eye takes in at once a great 
company of stars ; but if one wishes to tell of each in parti 
cular, which is the morning star, and which the evening, and 
so of each single star, there is need of many words. In like 
manner, the mind in the shortest moment of time compasses 
earth and sea, and all the bounds of the world ; but that 
which is thought of in an instant, takes many words to ex 
press. Yet forcible as is the instance I have given, still it is 
after all weak and inadequate. For we speak, not what we 
ought concerning God, (for to Him only is this known,) but 
what man s nature can, and our weakness is equal to. For 
we explain not what God is ; but we honestly confess that 

* nig) nufA09tcg%iaf,i.e. that God is ence, power, authority, &c. 
the sole principle of all things, of exist- 






Immensity of God contrasted with man s littleness. 6 1 

we have no exact knowledge of Him ; for on the subject of 
God, it is great knowledge to confess our want of knowledge*. 



ify, that, the Lord with me, and let us exalt His name Ps. 34, 
lot/cthcr. All of us jointly; for one is unequal to it; yea* 
rather, though all of us united, we should not even then do it 
adequately ; not only not you who are present, but not even 
if all the nurslings of all the universal Church, present and to 
come, should meet together, could they, worthily, sing the 
praises of the Shepherd. 

3. Abraham was great and honourable, but great in com- (2.) 
parison of men ; but when he drew nigh to God, then honestly 
avowing the truth, he saith, / am earth and ashes. He said Gen. 18, 
not, " Earth" only, and then was silent, lest he should call 
himself by the name of that mighty element : but he added, 
" and ashes ;" that he might represent his mouldering and 
frail nature. " Is there, saith he, any thing smaller or lighter 
than ashes ?" Take, he saith, the comparison of ashes with a 
house, of a house with a city, of a city with a province, of a 
province with the Roman empire, of the Roman empire with 
all the earth, and all its bounds ; then compare all the earth 
with the embosoming heaven, the earth, which holds such 
proportion to the heaven, as the centre of the wheel to all its 
circumference, (for such is the proportion between earth and 
heaven ;) think then that this first heaven which we see, is 
smaller than the second, and the second than the third, (for 
thus far hath Scripture named them, not that they are so 
many only, but so many only was it expedient for us to 
know,) and when thou hast in thought surveyed all the 
heavens, yet not even shall the heavens be able to praise God 
according to what He is, no, not though they should resound 
with a voice louder than thunder. But if the spheres of heaven, 
being so many, cannot worthily sing God s praise, how shall 
earth and ashes, that least and smallest of things existing, 
succeed in sending up a worthy song to God, or worthily to 
speak of God, that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, andi*. 40, 
the inhabitant* thereof are as grasshoppers? 22 

4. If any take in hand to speak concerning God, first let (3.) 
him declare the bounds of the earth. Thou dwellest on the 

b Vid. Hooker, Ecclec. Pol. i. 2. . 2. of man," &c. 
" Dangerous it were for the feeble brain 



62 God is incomprehensible. 

LECT. earth, and knowcst not the limit of the earth which is thy 

- dwelling ; how then wilt thou be able worthily to think of its 

Creator? Thou beholdest the stars, but their Maker thou 

beholdest not : count the stars, which are seen, and then set 

Ps. 147, f or th Him who is not seen; Who telleth the number of the 

stars, and calleth thou all by their names ! The pouring 

rains, which lately came down on us, well nigh destroyed us : 

number the drops which fell in this city only : nay, on thine 

own house in one hour, if thou canst ; but thou canst not. 

Know thou thine own weakness : and thence know the power 

Job 36, of God: for bu Him are numbered tlie drops of rain, which 

27 Seot. 

"have been poured down on the whole earth, not only now, 
but ever. The sun is the workmanship of God, great indeed, 
yet but a spot in comparison of the w r hole of heaven; first 
gaze stedfastly on the sun, and then curiously scan his Lord. 

Ecclus. Seek not that which is deeper than thou, and that which is 
3 21 22 

"stronger than thou search not out; but what is appointed 

thee, that consider. 

(4.) 5. But some one will say, If the Divine Nature is incom 
prehensible, why then dost thou discourse concerning these 
things ? Shall 1 then, since T cannot drink up all the river, 
not take in due measure even what is expedient for me? 
Because I cannot sustain with these eyes of mine the whole 
sun, shall I not behold even as much of him as suffices for 
my wants ? or, when I have entered into a great park, because 
T cannot eat all the fruits, wouldest thou have me depart 
actually hungry ? I praise and glorify Him w r ho hath made 
Ps. 150, us: for it is a Divine call which says, Let every thing that 
hath breath praise the Lord. I am attempting now to glorify 
the Lord, not to declare Him ; knowing indeed right well 
that I must fall short of worthily glorifying Him, but deeming 
it a work of godliness even to attempt it at all. For the Lord 

John 1, Jesus encourages my infirmity, saying, No one hath seen God 
18. . 

at any time. 

6. What then, some one will say, means the text, The 

Mat. 18, Angeh of the little ones al trays behold the face of My Father 
which is in hear en. Yes, but the Angels behold, not accord 
ing to what God is, but as they are able. For it is Jesus 

Jolm 6, Himself who saith, Not that any hath seen the Father, save 

A.R 

He which is of God: He hath seen the Father. The Angels 



(Jo(Fs perfections. 

then behold as they can bear, and the Archangels as they 

are able; and Thrones and Dominions, though more fully 

than these, yet less than God s excellency. But only the 

Holy Ghost together with the Son, can behold Him worthily: 

for the Spirit wnn-ln&gt;lh all ////////.v, and knoweth even the deep} Cor. 

thinys of (, &lt;&gt;&lt;/. For as the Only-begotten Son, together with 2 ] 

the 1 1 olv Ghost, fnllv knoweth the Father, ( for neither knoweth Mat. 11, 

* 97 

ami one the /-a/hrr, saith He, save the Son, and he to whom- 
soever the Son trill re real Him,} so while He beholdeth fully, 
He, with and through the Holy Ghost, revealeth God, accord 
ing as each can bear : since the Only-begotten Son together 
with the Holy Ghost is a partaker of the Father s Godhead. 
He, who without passion was begotten before the world y 
Ict/tttij knoweth Him who begat; and He who begat knoweth^. 
Him who was begotten. When even Angels then are ignorant, 2 Tim. I, 
(for to each according to his own capacity doth the Only- 
begotten reveal Him through and with the Holy Ghost, as 
we have said,) let none of men be ashamed to own his 
ignorance. I am now speaking, as all do in place ; but how 
we speak, we cannot tell: how then can I declare Him who 
hath given us the gift of speech? I who have a soul, yet 
cannot tell its lineaments ; how then shall I be equal to 
describe its Giver? 

7. It suffices us for devotion, to know that we have a God ; (5.) 
a God who is One, a God who is, is always ; always like unto 
Himself; and has no Father, none mightier than Himself, no 
successor to dispossess Him of His kingdom: manifold in 
bone, all-powerful, in substance uniform. For though He i; 
called Good, and Just, and Almighty, and Sabaoth*, He is 
not therefore distinct and various ; but being Himself one and 
the same, lie dispenses the countless operations of the God 
head, not abounding here and deficient there, but being in 
all things like unto Himself. Not great in loving-kindness 
only, and little in wisdom, but with wisdom and loving-kind- 
iess in equal measure ; not seeing here, and not seeing there ; 
t)ut being all eye, and all ear, and all mind ; not as we, per 
ceiving here, and ignorant there; for this is blasphemy, and 

* This is sometimes taken in antiquity Apoth. v. 837. Est impossible spectare 
utely as a name of God, considered profunda Sabaoth, i. e. Dei. Ed. Be- 
la Lord of Angels. Vid. Pnidentius, ned. 



T} WO- 



04 God is a Spirit, and all in all. 

LECT. unworthy of the Divine substance. He foreknows events ; 
He is Holy, and Almighty, and kinder, greater, and wiser 



_ / 

ftuf than all ; and is unspeakable as to His beginning, and form, 

John 5, and nature. Ye hare neither heard His voice at ami time. 
37 

nor seen His shape, says holy Scripture ; and therefore Moses 

Deut. 4, says to the Israelites, Take ye therefore good heed unto your 
selves ; for ye saw no manner of similitude: for if His out 
ward appearance is utterly incapable of delineation, much less 

ivtffra.- is His substance unimaginable. 

/g \ 8. Many and by many have been the delineations, but all 
have failed. Some men have thought that God is fire ; others 
that He is like a man, but winged, because of a true text, ill 

Ps.17, 8. understood, Hide me under Hie shadow of Thy winys. They 
forget that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Only-begotten, said 

Mat. 23, likewise concerning Himself to Jerusalem, How often would 
I hare gathered thy children together, eren (is a hen gather- 
etli her chickens under her winy*, and ye would not. For 
His guardian power being taken as wings, these men, not 
understanding, and grovelling among human things, conceived 
of the Unsearchable in a human way. And others have dared 

Zech. 4, to say, that He has seven eyes, because it is written, The 
seven eyes of the Lord which run to and fro through the 
whole earth. For if He has but seven eyes round about Him, 
here and there, then His sight too is here and there, and not 
all-perfect: which is blasphemy. God is to be accounted 
perfect in all things, according to the Saviour s saying, 

Mat. 5, Your Father which is in heaven is perfect : perfect in sight, 
perfect in power, perfect in greatness, perfect in foreknow 
ledge, perfect in goodness, perfect in righteousness, perfect 
in loving-kindness. Not limited by place, but the Maker of 
all place : who is in all, and is circumscribed by none. 

Is. 66, 1. Hear en is His throne, but He who is seated on it reaches 
far above it : Earth is His footstool, but His power extends 
to the realms beneath the earth. 

9. One there is, all-present, all-seeing, all-understanding, 

John 1, creating all through Christ: for all things were made by 
Him, and without Him was not a thing made ; a fount of 
all good, a fount immense and inexhaustible, a river of 
blessings, Light eternal beaming inexhaustibly, Power irre 
sistible, condescending to our infirmities : whose very Name 



Degraded worship of the heathen. 65 



is too awful to hear. Wilt Ihon Jind // footstep of 
Lord, saith Job, or hast Uiou attained unto the least things & 
it Iiich the Almighty hath made? If the last of His works 
cannot be comprehended, shall He be comprehended who 
made all things ? Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 1 Cor. 
neither hare entered into the heart of man, the thiuys which ~ 
God hath prepared for them that lore Him. If those things 
which God hath prepared are to our minds incomprehensible, 
can we in thought comprehend Him their preparer? O (he Horn. 

1 1 *^*^ 

depth of the riches both of the irisdom and knowledge of 
God! how unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways 
past finding out ! says the Apostle: if His judgments and 
ways are unattainable, shall He Himself be attained ? 

10. Though God is so great, yea, and greater (for though (70 
the whole of me became tongue, it could not speak adequately, 
rather, not even all Angels joined together would suffice,) though 

I say, the Great and Good God is such, yet did man grave a 
stone, and dare to say to it, Thou art my God! O great blind- Is. 44, 

1 n 

ness, from such greatness descending to such abjectness ! The 
tree which God has planted, and the rain increased, and which 
then is burnt to ashes, this forsooth is named God ; but the true 
God is made light of. The wickedness of idolatry wrought 
lavishly; and cat, dog, wolf, were worshipped instead of God. 
The lion who devours man was worshipped for God who 
tenderly loves him ; serpent and dragon, counterparts of him 
who cast us out of Paradise, were worshipped ; He who 
planted Paradise was thought lightly of. Nay, I feel shame 
while I say it, even onions have been before now worshipped. 
Wine was given, to make glad the heart of man ; and Bac- p s . 104, 
chus was worshipped in the place of God : God made corn 15 * 
by saying, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding G^. 1, 
seed after its kind, that bread might strengthen mail s heart ; u&gt; 
whence then was Ceres worshipped ? fire even to this day is \$[ 
struck out from stones by collision; whence then Vulcan, the 
maker of fire ? 

11. Whence the Greek false doctrine of many gods ? God 
is incorporeal : whence then the adulteries, which are charged 
upon their so called gods ? I will be silent of the changes of 
Jupiter into a swan : I am ashamed to speak of his trans 
formations into a bull ; as if lo wings were worthy of a god. 



(&gt;6 The Manichees held two first principles., good and evil. 

LECT. The god of the Greeks is convicted of adultery, yet are they 
- not ashamed : but if he is an adulterer, let him not be called 
god. They tell too of deaths among their gods, and expul 
sions, and blastings by thunder; seest thou how high they were 
and now how fallen? Surely it was not for nought that the 
Son of God came down from heaven, when it was to heal so 
great a wound ; it was not for nought the Son came, that the 
Father might be acknowledged. Thou hast learned, what 
moved the Only-begotten to come down from the throne on 
God s right hand. The Father was despised ; it behoved the 
Son to set right this departure ; for it behoved Him by whom 
all things were made, to bring all things near unto the Lord 
of all. The wound had to be cured ; for what was worse 
than such a sickness, the worshipping a stone for God ? 

Of Heresies. 

\ 12. And not only among the Gentiles hath the Devil waged 
this contest ; but many falsely called Christians, wrongfully 
designated by the sweet name of Christ, have been impious 
enough to dare separate God from His own works. I mean 
the tribe of heretics, men of evil name and utter un- 
godliness, in pretence lovers of Christ, but altogether His 
enemies : for he who blasphemes Christ s Father, is an enemy 
of the Son. These men" have dared to say that there are 
two godheads, one good, and one evil. Exceeding blindness ! 
If a Godhead then, must it not be altogether good ? but if 
not good, why called Godhead? for goodness belongs to 
God. For since there belongeth to God, loving-kindness, 
beneficence, omnipotence, let them do one of two things; 
let them call Him God in operation as well as in name ; or 
if they mean to deprive Him of His operative power, let 
them not give Him the bare name. 

13. Heretics have dared to say, that there are two Gods, a 

source of good, and a source of evil, and that both these are 

unoriginate. If both are unoriginate, certainly they must be 

equal also, and both mighty : how then doth the light destroy 

the darkness? Again, are they ever together, or are they 

2 Cor. separate ? Together they cannot be, for what fellowship hath 

6 14 light with darkness, saith the Apostle; but if they are far 

b i. f. The Manichees. 



/ &lt;ra/ 



Argument* (ujuinxt thix doctrine. f&gt;7 

one from another, doubtless each lias his own place, and if so, 

doubtless we are in the realms of one God : doubtless also 

we worship one God. Thus the argument holds for the 

worship of one God, even granting their absurd doctrine. 

Next let us examine what they say of the good God. Is He 

powerful, or powerless ? If powerful, how came evil, against 

His will? and how does the evil substance introduce itself, 

without His consent? If He knows, but cannot hinder, they 

impute to Him want of power; but unfaithfulness, if He is 

able, yet hinders it not. And consider their inconsistency; at 

one time they say, that as to the world s creation the evil God 

has nothing in common with the good God : at another time, 

only the fourth part. And they say that the good God is the 

l uther of Christ ; yet they call the sun, Christ. If then the 

world, according to them, was made by the evil God, and the 

sun is in the world ; how is the Son of the good God an 

unwilling minister in the works of the evil God ? It is to 

touch mire even to say these things ; but I say them, lest any 

here present from not knowing better fall into heretical mire 

themselves. I know that I am polluting my own mouth, and 

your ears : but it is expedient ; fitter much that you should 

hear these monstrous things charged against third persons, 

than out of ignorance fall into them: that thou shouldest 

know the mire and hate it, than know it not and fall into it. 

Heretical impiety is a way with many branches ; when a man 

once strays from the one direct road, he often gets into pre- 

i ipitous ground. 

14. And of all heresy Simon Magus was the originator, (9.) 
Simon who, in the Acts of the Apostles, expected to purchase 
with money the unpurchaseable gift of the Spirit, and who 
heard these w r ords, Thou hast neither part nor lot in this Act* 8, 
matter, and the rest ; of whom it is written, Tliey icent out 18 ~ 2L 
from UK, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, 2, 19. 
they inntlil no doubt have continued -with us. Having come to 
Rome, after he had been cast out by the Apostles, and gaining 
over a profligate woman called Helena, he commenced by 
daring with blasphemous lips to say, that he had appeared as 
the Father on Mount Sinai ; that afterward among the Jews, he 
had shewn himself as Christ, not in the flesh, but in appear- 
since : and after this as the Holy Ghost, of whom Christ had 

F2 



above 



68 History and heresy of Simon Magus, of Mar cum, 

LECT. promised, that He should be sent as the Comforter. And he 

VL so deceived the Roman state, that Claudius set up a statue 

of him, writing under it in the Roman tongue, SIMONI DEO 

SANCTO: which being interpreted is, "To Simon the Holy 

GodV 

15. The error spreading, that goodly pair, Peter and Paul, 

vid. ^ ru lers of the Church, being present, set matters right 
e r . jr. 

Lect. iv. again ; and on Simon the supposed God, attempting a dis 

play, they straightway laid him dead. Simon, that is, 
promised that he should be raised aloft towards heaven, and 
accordingly was borne through the air on a chariot of Dae 
mons ; on which the servants of God falling on their knees, 
gave an instance of that agreement, of which Jesus said, If 

MAI. IB, two of you shall agree as tow/tiny any thing that they sJtull 

9 * ask, it shall be done for tltcni : and reaching the sorcerer 

with this unanimity of their prayer, they precipitated him 

to the earth. For is this strange, though it be strange? for 

Mat. 16, it was Peter, he who bears with him the keys of heaven: 
is it astonishing ? for it was Paul, he who was caught up into 

v&gt; or* 

12, 2.4. the third Heaven, and into paradise, and who heard un 
speakable words, which it is not lawful Jo r a man to utter. 
It was these, I say, who precipitated from air to earth the 
supposed God, on his journey to the place under the earth. 
He then was the first serpent of evil : but though one head 
had been cut off, the root of evil turned out many -headed. 
(10.) 16. Cerinthus wasted the Church, and Menander, and 
Carpocrates : and the Ebionites, and Marcion, a very mouth 
piece of ungodliness ; for one who teaches different Gods, one 

John 17, good, the other just, contradicts the Son, who says, Righteous 
Father. Again, one who says that the Father is different 
from the Maker of the world, is at variance with the Son who 

Luke 12, savs, If then God so clothe the grass, which is to-day in the 

OQ " " 

Mat 5 fi e ^9 an d to-morrow is cast into the oven ; and Who maketh 

45. His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain 

on the just and on the unjust. This Marcion, then, came 

c This account originates in; Justin Sex. Pompeius &c. Sangus or Sancus 

Martyr, who says he saw the statue in the was a Sabine God. vid. Lact. i. 15. 

island of the Tiber. A doubt, however, Aust. de Civ. D. xviii. 19. That Simon 

is cast on it,from a stone havingbeendug was struck dead at Rome by St. Peter is 

up in this very island in the Pontificate of confirmed by the cautious Eusebius, but 

Gregory XIII, A. D. 1585, with this in- the details of the occurrence are not 

scription, Semoni Sango Deo Sacrum, certain. 



of Valent uuLs. 69 

next, the originator of another error; for being refuted by 
the texts from the Old Testament which are cited in the 
New, he who had already effaced the idea of God, was 
the first to venture also on cutting out those very testimonies 
to the word of faith preached in the Gospel ; and to consent to 
weaken the Church s faith, as though there had been no 
heralds of it. 

17. Next came Basilides, of evil fame, plausible in his 
bearing, and a preacher of profligacy. Valentinus aided the (11.) 
wretched cause, with his announcement of thirty Gods. The 
Greeks tell of few : but this man, in name though not in truth 
a Christian, carried on their fiction to a whole thirty d . And 
he says that Bythus, the Abyss, begat Silence ; (for it became 
him who is the abyss of wickedness, to begin his doctrine 
from the Abyss ;) and that of Silence he begat the Word. 
This Bythus is worse than the Jupiter of the Greeks, who 
was married to his sister : for Silence was said to be the child 
of Bythus. What a monstrous doctrine to be cloked under 
the pretence of Christianity ! but wait awhile, and thou shalt 
hate the impious creed. He says that of him were begotten 
eight JEons, or Ages : and of them, ten more : and of them, 
other twelve, male and female. And what is the proof of all 
this ? their arguments are as absurd as their creed ; how dost 
thou demonstrate the thirty ^Eons ? because, says he, it is 
written, that Jesus was baptized, being thirty years old: Luke 3, 
granting the fact, what a demonstration is this? He broke 23 
five loaves among five thousand ; are there therefore five 
Gods ? or because He had twelve disciples, must there be 
twelve ? 

18. Even this however is little compared with the impious 
things which follow: he says, that the last of the Gods is 
both male and female ; (thus he dares to speak,) and that this 
N Wisdom : alas! what blasphemy ! for Christ is the Wisdom of \ Cor. 
God, II is only-begotten Son : and yet his doctrine degraded the 
Wisdom of God to a female nature, and a thirtieth principle, 
and the last creation. And he says, that Wisdom attempted 
to behold the first God; but that, not bearing his brightness, 
she fell from heaven, and forfeited the thirtieth place; that 

Licet Gentiles duodecim Deos ap- duos ^Eonas colant quo* appellant Deos. 
pellent, isti [Valentiniani] triginti et Ajnbros. Ep. xl. 16. ap. Ed. Bened. 



70 History of Manicheism. 

LECT. tlien as she groaned, her groans begat the devil : and while 
she wept her downfal, she gave being to the sea. What 
blasphemy ! as if the devil could be born from Wisdom, and 
evil from understanding, or from light, darkness ? And he 
says, that the devil begat others, some of whom framed 
the world; and that the Christ came down, to make men 
revolt from the Maker of the World. 

19. Now listen, whom they say that Christ Jesus is; that 

thou mayest hate them still more. They teach then, that 

when Wisdom was cast out, in order that the number of the 

thirty might not be incomplete, the nine and twenty 2ons 

each contributed some little element, and formed the Christ: 

and him again, as they say, both male and female. Can there 

be aught more blasphemous, aught more miserable than this? 

I go through their heresy, to make you hate them more. 

2 John Flee then such blasphemy, nor bid such (in one God speed) 

]/", . lest thou havefellou xhiit icitli tltc unfruitful works of dark - 

11. y/r.sv. And be not curious about them, nor seek to converse 

with them. 

(12.) 20. Thou must hate all heretics, but especially him who 
even in name is a Maniac ; who arose lately under the 
Emperor Probus : (for the error is just seventy years stand 
ing,) and there are to this day men who have seen him with 
their own eyes. But hate him not for this, that he is of 
recent date ; but because of his impious doctrines, hate thou 
this worker of evil, this reservoir of all pollution, who hath 
taken on him the filth of every heresy. For being ambitious 
of distinction among the bad, he took the doctrines of all, 
and having framed one heresy filled with blasphemies, and 
with all wickedness, he devastates the Church, (or rather 
those without it,) like a lion ranging about, and devouring. 
Heed not thou their fair speeches, nor their supposed humi 
lity : for they are serpents, the offspring of vipers. Judas too 
said, Hail Master, and betrayed Him : heed not that they kiss, 
but guard against their venom. 

21. Lest I seem to bring these charges without grounds, I 
will go out of the way to say who this Manes is, and to a 
certain point what he teaches ; as to giving a full account of 
his foul teaching, no time would be long enough. It will 
serve as an aid in season, to lay up in thy memory what I 



Scythianus, Terebinthus or Kuddas. 71 

have said on other occasions and shall repeat now, with the 
view of informing the ignorant and reminding the informed. 
Manes did not rise from the Christian body ; God forbid ! 
nor like Simon was he cast out of the Church, neither he, nor 
those who taught before him, for he is a pilferer and appro- 
priator of other men s sins ; but how, and after what manner, 
ye must hear. 

20. There was in Egypt a certain Scythianus, a Saracen 8 (13.) 
by race, without any thing in common either with Judaism, 
or with Christianity. This man, who dwelt at Alexandria, 
as an Aristotelian, composed four books : one called the 
Gospel, yet not an account of the acts of Christ, though 
bearing this title ; and another called the Book of Chapters &gt; 
and a third called the Book of Mysteries ; and a fourth, which 
they now use, called the Treasure. This man had a disciple, 
Terebinthus by name ; as for Scythianus himself he passed 
into Judaea, and while he was engaged in infecting that 
country, the Lord took him off by a sickness, and stopped 
the plague. 

23. Terebinthus, his disciple in wicked error, was heir of 
his gold, his books, and his heresy : he made his appearance 
in Palestine ; but on being recognized and condemned in 
Judaoa, he resolved to pass into Persia ; and to prevent a 
second recognition from his name, he changed it to Buddas. 
But there he found opponents, the ministers of Mithras: and 
being subjected to a series of defeats in discussion and 
controversy, at last hard pressed, he betakes himself to a 
certain widow. Then having gone up to the top of the 
house, and invoked the Daemons of the air, whom the 
Manichaeans to this day invoke upon their detestable cere 
mony of the iig f , he was stricken of God, fell headlong from 
the house, and gave up the ghost : and thus the second 
monster was cut off. 

24. The books, however, the records of impiety, remained; 
and these and the property the widow inherited. And where 
as she had neither kinsman, nor any one else, she determined 
out of the money to purchase a boy, named Cubricus: and 
having adopted him, she brought him up as a son in the 

e The Saracens are first mentioned Hist. vi. 42. 
by Dionysius of Alexandria, apudEuspb. f Vid. infra, . 33. 



72 Cubricus or Manes, fails to cure the Persian King s son. 

ECT. learning of the Persians, and thus sharpened an evil weapon 
against mankind. So Cubricus, her wicked servant, grew up 



in the midst of philosophers ; and on her death, inherited the 
books, and the money. Then, lest the name of slavery should 
be a reproach to him, he called himself instead of Cubricus, 
Manes, which in the Persian language means, discourse : for 
since a disputant seemed to be a character of weight, he 
so surnamed himself, as though he were a most excellent 
discourser. But though he put himself to pains to gain 
repute according to the Persian language, yet by the Divine 
dispensation he was made still an unwilling witness against 
himself; so as to honour himself in Persia, at the expense of 
proclaiming himself a maniac among the Greeks. 
(14.) 25. And he dared to say that he was the Paraclete 5 ; 
Mark 3, though it be written, But he who shall blaspheme against the 
Holy Ghost, hath no forgiveness. He then blasphemed, say-" 
ing that he was the Holy Ghost ; let him that hath fellowship 
with them, take heed with whom he is ranking himself. The 
Prov.30, servant shook the world, since for three things the earth is 
21.22. (H S qui e ted, and the fourth it cannot bear, when a servant 
rciyncth. And having come into public, he now began to 
promise things superhuman. The son of the king of the 
Persians was sick, and a great crowd of physicians was 
in attendance. Manes promised to restore him by prayer, as 
though he w r ere a devout man. The physicians departed, and 
the child s life with them, this detected the man s impiety ; 
our philosopher came into bonds, being cast into prison, not 
for reproving the king for truth s sake, not for overthrowing 
the idols, but for promising to save, and lying ; yea rather, 
to say truth, for committing murder. For a patient who 
might have been cured by medical treatment, he in sending 
away the physicians, murdered by want of that treatment. 

26. But in this enumeration of his multiplied offences, re 
member first his blasphemy ; secondly, his slavery; (not that 
slavery is a shame to a man, but that for a man who is a 
slave to feign himself free, is an offence ;) thirdly, the false 
hood of his promise ; fourthly, the murder of the child ; 

% That Manes or Manichseus professed bius, Hist. vii. 31. Theodoret, Hser. i. 
himself to be the promised Paraclete or 26. and Austin, contr. Faust, xxxii. 16. 
Spirit of Christ, is confirmed by Euse- 17. 



Flies into Mesopotamia ; Archelaus encounters him. 73 

fifthly, tlie shame of the prison. And there was not only the 
shame of the prison, but also the flight from the prison ; yea, 
he who said that he was the Paraclete, and the champion of 
Truth, fled. He was not a successor of Jesus, who readily 
r.imt to the cross ; he was the reverse, a runaway. Then the 
king of Persia ordered the keepers of the prison to be led off 
to capital punishment. Manes was through his presumption 
tin- cause of the child s death: so too was he the cause of the 
keepers death through his flight. Is he then who has a 
slmre in murder, fit to be worshipped? Ought he not to have 
followed Jesus, and said, If ye seek me, let these go their John 18, 
iniy ? ought he not to have said like Jonas, Take me, 



cast vie into the sea ; for my sake is this great tempest ? 12 - 

27. lie flies from prison, and comes to Mesopotamia ; but (15.) 
there the Bishop Archelaus meets him as a weapon of righte 
ousness, who argued with him before philosophers as judges, 
bringing together a Gentile audience, lest if Christians 
judged, the judges might be considered partial. And he 
says to Manes, " Tell us what thou preachest." He, whose Ps. 5, 9. 
mouth was an open sepulchre, began his defence with blas 
phemies against the Maker of all things. " The God of the 
Old Testament is the inventor of evil ; for He saith of Himself, 
/ am a consuming Jire" But Archelaus skilfully met the bias- Deut 4, 
phemous argument; " If the God of the Old Testament, he 24 
said, according to thy words, calls Himself fire, whose Son is 
He who saith, / am come to send fire on the earth ! If thou Luk e!2, 
find fault with Him who saith, The Lord killeth and maketkistam. 
nl irr, wherefore honourest thou Peter, who though he raised 2 6 - 
Tabitha, yet slew Sapphira ? If again thou findest fault with 
Him as preparing fire, wherefore not with Him who says, 
Depart from -me into everlasting fire ? If with Him who Mat. 25, 
sa\s, / fun t/te God that maketh peace and create evil ;il 45t7t 
explain how Jesus saith, I am not come to send peace, but # Mat. 10, 
xtmrd : Since both speak the same language, one of two^n- 
things must follow: either both are right, because they agree " *" x ; 
in these words : or if Jesus is unreproveable in so speaking, 
why reproachest thou Him who in the Old Testament says 
the same?" 

2. Then says Manes to him: " And what sort of God is (16.) 

lie who blinds men ? For it is Paul who says, In whom ilie^ Cor - 

4, 4. 



74 Mysteries not to be revealed to unbelievers. 

LECT. God of this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe 

- not, that the light of the Gospel might not shine into them" 

But Archelaus retorted well, " Read what comes just before, 



Ib. ver. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid in them that are lost. 

Seest thou, it is in the lost that it is hid ? For we must 
Mat. 7, not give what is holy to the dogs. Again, is it only the God 

of the Old Testament who hath blinded the minds of the un- 

Mat. 13, believers ? And hath not Jesus Himself said, For this cause 
13. 

speak I unto them in parables, that seeing they may not see ? 

Was it because He hated them, that He would not that they 
should see ? or was it because of this unworthiness, since 

Mat. 13, they had closed their eyes? For where there is self-chosen 
" 2 depravity, there is also the withholding of grace: for to him 

29. that hath shall be f/icett^ but from him that hath not shall be 



Luke 8, taken even that n-JiicJt he seemetlt to hace" 
i R 

29. Or we may say, as some explain, and not despicably, If 
He hath indeed blinded the minds of the unbelievers, He hath 
blinded them for good purpose, that they may recover their 
sight to what is good ; for He hath not said, " He hath blinded 
y^T. the soul," but, the thoughts of the unbelievers. For what He 
says is something of this kind ; " Blind the profligate thoughts 
of the profligate man, and he is saved: blind the rapacious 
and plundering spirit of the robber, and he is saved." If thou 
wilt not so take it, there is yet another exposition of it. The 
sun too blinds those who are dull of sight ; and men with weak 
eyes are blinded, the light distressing them ; not that the sun is 
of a blinding nature, but because their eyes themselves do not 
see. And he hath not said, "He hath blinded their thoughts," 
Mat. 13, that they might not hear the Gospel, but, that the tight of the 
Mark 4 9^ orl J f ^ ie Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ should not shine 
34. unto them. For to hear the Gospel is allowed to all: but the 
glory of the Gospel is set apart for them who are truly 
Christ s. Therefore our Lord spake in parables to them 
who were not able to hear; but to His disciples He ex 
pounded them privately: for the brightness of glory is for 
the Illuminated, but blindness for the unbelievers. These 
mysteries which the Church now speaks to thee who art 
removed from among the Catechumens, it is not the custom 
to speak to Gentiles: for to a Gentile we speak not the 
mysteries concerning the Father and the Son, and the Holy 



Death of Manes ; his doctrine*. 75 

Spirit, nor before Catechumens do we discourse plainly about 
mysteries; but many tilings many times we speak in a covert 
manlier, that the faithful who know may understand, and that 
those who know not may receive no hurt. 

30. With such words and many more was the serpent over 
come ; thus did Archelaus wrestle with Manes, and threw 
him. Again he, who had fled from prison, flies from this (17.) 
place also : and, having escaped his adversary, he comes to a 
very mean village ; like the serpent in Paradise who left Adam, 

and came to Kve. But the good shepherd Archelaus taking 
thought for the sheep, when he heard of his flight, straight 
way with all speed hastened in search of the wolf. Manes 
seeing his adversary unexpectedly, rushed away and fled; 
and fled for the last time. For the guards of the king of Persia, 
being on the search, arrest the runaway, and inflict on him the *) 
sentence which he was on the point of receiving at the see 
of Archelaus. That Manes, who is now worshipped by his Ke frora 
disciples, is seized, and led to the king ; the king cast in his pu iace. 
teeth his falsehood and flight; derided his slavish condition; 
avenged the murder of his son ; condemned him also for the 
murder of the jailors. He orders Manes to be flayed after the 
Persian fashion ; and the rest of his body was thrown as food 
for wild beasts : but his skin, that receptacle of a most foul 
mind, was hung up like a sack before the gates. He who 
called himself the Paraclete, and professed to know things to 
come, knew not his own flight and seizure* 1 . 

31. This man had three disciples, Thomas, and Baddas, (18.) 
and Hernias. Let no one read the gospel according to 
Thomas, for it is the work, not of one of the Twelve Apostles, 

but of one of the three evil followers of Manes. Let no one 
join himself to the soul- wasting Manichees, who affects 
the harshness of fasting with chaff and water, who gorge X" 
themselves with the daintiest of meats, while they speak 
against the Creator, who teach, that he who plucks up a 
herb, is changed into it . For if he who crops a herb, or any 
\&lt; uetable, is changed into it, into how many will husband 
men and the tribe of gardeners be changed? Into how 



h The forcLMMiiir account of the history laus, Act. Disput. 

iiul his predecessors, is con"- Vid. the account of the Manichaean 

firmed in sulxtance by Socrates, Hist, heresy appended to the Translation of 

i. 22. Epiphanius, Har. 66. and Arche- S. Austin s Confessions 



76 Doctrine* and rites of Manichcism. 

LECT. many doth the gardener put his sickle, as we see; into 
which then of these is he transformed ? Ridiculous doctrines 
truly, and fraught with their own condemnation and shame ! 
A shepherd both sacrifices a sheep and slays a wolf; into 
which is he changed ? Many men have both netted fishes 
and limed birds ; into which are they changed ? 

32. Let the Manichees, children of sloth, answer ; who 
themselves work not, and eat up the labours of those who 
do ; who receive with smiling countenances those who bring 
them meats, and return them curses instead of blessings. 
For when some simple person brings them any thing, the 
Manichee says, " Stand forth a little, and I will bless 
thee:" then having received the bread into his hand, (as 
some of them who have repented have confessed,) he says to 
the bread, " I did not make thee ;" and he utters curses 
against the Highest, and curses him that made the bread, and 
thus eats what is made. If thou hatest food, why didst thou 
look with a smiling face on him who brought it ? Tf thou art 
grateful to him who brought it, why utterest thou blasphemy 
against God who made and fashioned it ? And again he says, 
" I did not sow thee ; may the sower of thee be sown ! I did 

*- 

not reap thee with a sickle; may the reaper of thee be reaped ! 
I baked thee not with fire ; may the baker of thee be baked !" 
A fair return this for kindness. 

33. These are great offences, yet but small in comparison 
of what remains behind. I do not venture to describe their 
Baptism k before men and women. I do not venture to say 
what they dispense to their wretched congregations 1 . It is 
truly a pollution of our lips to speak on the subject. Are 
Greeks more loathsome ? are Samaritans more abandoned ? 
and Jews more blasphemous ? are open profligates more 
unclean ? The Manichee at the very altar, as he thinks right, 
places his offering; and dost thou, O man, accept teaching 



k The Manichees of later times seem M/a/ vo^Ev aXvffus TO fr apa. x. &lt;r. A. 
to have rejected Baptism, using oil for m O pi* ya.^ fogveufa; , -r^ot piav ugav J/ 
water, or considering Baptism a spiritual \*thtpu* rtXtTrvv -r^a^iv xccrayiv&iffxut Ji 
wnshing. Ed. Bened. TVS ft&gt;a.%,to&gt;&gt;s . u$ ftiavfa); eT$i Xou-rgou \&lt;ri- 

1 The original runs thus : Ou ro\i^u $top.ivof, xai yivutrxn &lt;rrn &lt;*a%&lt;u; ro 

. *O 



ov 



. &ii%gts yag TO, iv rots ivuxvicttrftolis xat,} ro ffro/^a xtti TV* yXurretv. 
\v6vfiiiff6wffiv, xeti yvvu7&gt;cts ra. Iv atptigoif. roioureu rroftaros, otvfyuvi x. r. X. 



Contrast between the Church and heresy. 77 

at such a mouth ? dost thou meet him and greet him at all 
with a kiss; and not rather, without reference to his other 
blasphemy, flee from this defiled teacher, from a man worse 
than dissolute, more loathsome than any haunt of profligacy i 

:H. These things the Church tells of and teaches thee, and 
touches mire, that thou be not bemired : she tells of wounds, 
that thou be not wounded. Suffice it thee to know the fact; 
attempt not to learn by experience. God thunders, and 
we all tremble ; but they blaspheme. God lightens, and we 
all bow down to earth ; but they have blasphemous tongues 
concerning the heavens, which are written in their books, 
and which we have read, disbelieving those who affirmed 
them : yes, for your salvation, we have closely inquired into 
their deadly doctrines". 

35. But may the Lord deliver us from such error: and may (20.) 
you be vouchsafed enmity against the serpent ; that as they 
watch the heel, so you in turn may trample on their head. 
Remember the text, What agreement is there between our 

matters and theirs? what hath liqht to do with darkness? 1 * Cor. 

. . 6 14 

What the majesty of the Church with the abomination of the 

Manichees? Here is order, here is discipline, here majesty, 



here chastity: here even a wanton glance is condemnation.^" j n *. 
Here is marriage with seriousness, and perseverance in conti- trod - 
r.ence, and the angelical rank of a virgin life, feasting with 4. 
thanksgiving, and towards the Maker of the world an affec- fy*f*- 

tj cj f 

tionate heart. Here the Father of Christ is worshipped; ^ 



is taught fear and trembling towards Him who sends us rain, } "" 4 
and praise ascribed to Him who thunders and lightens. 

3(5. Fold thou with the sheep: flee the wolves; depart not 
from the Church. Nay, abhor those who at any time have 
come into suspicion of such things; and unless in the course 
of time thou ascertain their repentance, be not hasty to trust 
thyself with them. The truth is now delivered to thee, how 

1 Kftxt~*9t wigj ouettvev* raf }vtr&lt;Qvi[*.ov{ revs rJf 



&lt;rtv xcti xitra. TJV rou %iiftuias xetigav, f 
ov Xi* ctirou ivot- ttlrbv icnr iliv &lt;r -rnofiveu. xet~i 



ir ixttiav; */ amtuj, xet &gt;(&gt;ii ivw ttff, rev 2 i&lt;3ririuv, lira, 



xat a.yetouf . Ka.xit*atXiyov/ru, %ovrct eovv, a.-rn ruv guruv ctrou 

el lire] i \ourucrii fUUUH JftMtWU, KO.} iUvtzi rot litre*. Tatvrit yiyaxr-reti iv ro7i 

n, on Im ri; T^JV; iv ou- -ruv Ma/^/(w /3//3Xa/f &lt;ra,UT&lt;t 

(tiro. iinffev ivnious, to.} yiupiv x,. T. X. 
xaroe rru- T xctpriXu* ri Xu*a;y xxigov, 



78 IVantittfi ctyaintf 1i.fre.si/. 

LECT. God only is the First Principle of all things; distinguish 
one pasturage of doctrine from another. Be thou a good 



banker , holdhnj last what is good, abstaining from all 
Via. i appearance of erll. But if thou thyself wert even one of them, 

I*K*icc ft 

21. 22. now tna t thou hast discovered thine error, abhor it. It will 
prove a way of salvation, to vomit it up ; to hate it from thy 
heart; to shun them too, not with thy lips only, but with 
thy soul also; to bow down to the Father of Christ, the God 
of the Law and the Prophets ; to acknowledge the Good and 
the Just, to be One and the same God. May He keep all of 
you, guarding you from fall and offence, stablished in the 
Faith, in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory for ever 
and ever. Amen. 



rbov b ox.ipos T&lt;ri/Tjj. These iii, 50 &c. Dionys. Alex. ap.Euseb. Hist. 

words, which are frequently quoted in vii. 7. Origen. in Joan. viii. 20. &e. 

antiquity, are sometimes ascribed to our Ussher, Valesius, &c. consider it taken 

Lord, sometimes to S.Paul. Vid.Constit. from the Gospel according to the He- 

Apost. ii. 36. Clementin. Horn. ii. 51. brews. 



LECTURE VII. 

ON GOD, THE FATHER. 



EPH. iii. 14, 15. 

For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus 

Christ, of whom the whole family of heaven and earth is named. 

1. OF God as the One Principle of all things I said enough 
yesterday ; enough, I mean, not in respect to the subject, 



mortal nature cannot reach this,) but in the measure of our j the 
weakness; and I trod the bye paths which have been variously God. 
struck out by profane heretics: now, shaking from us their 
foul and soul-destroying doctrine, and remembering it not to 
our hurt, but for their detestation, let us revert to ourselves, 
and receive the salutary articles of the true Faith, joining to 
the dignity of God s sole sovereignty, the attribute of Father, 
and believing in One God the Father, It is not enough to 
believe in One God: we must receive with reverence this 
also, that He is the Father of the Only -begotten, our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

2. For thus our view of religion will rise above the Jewish. (2.) 
For the Jews receive indeed the doctrine of the One God ; 
(though they have often denied this too by committing idol 
atry ;) but they deny that He is also the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, differing from their own Prophets, who say in 
Holy Scripture, The Lord hath said unto Me, Tliou art My Ps.2, 7. 
Son, this day have I begotten Tliee. Even to this day they 
rage and gather against the Lord and against His Christ, Ps. 2, 1. 

A 

thinking that the Father may be made their friend, apart 

from devotion towards the Son; knowing not that no man John 14, 

/^ 

coineth to the Father, but by the Son, who saith, I am the 
door, and / am the u-aij. He then who declines the Way 9. 
which leads to the Father, and denies the Door, how shall he John I4 
be vouchsafed entrance to God ? They contradict too the 
words of the eighty-eighth* Psalm: He shall cry unto Me, Ps. 89, 
Thoit tirt My Fat her, My God, and the rock of My salvation; " 

* i. e. Psalm 89. In the Greek and the Psalms are numbered differently 
1 . itin Versions, as need scarcely be said, from the English. 



80 The. name of Father implies the Son. 

LECT. also, I will make Him My Jirst-born, higher than the 

- the earth. If they contend that these things are spoken to 



ffl TO 

ytwriv 



David, or Solomon, or some of their successors, they have to 
shew how the throne of him whom they consider to be the 
Ps. 89, object of the prophecy, is as the days of hearcn, and as the 

sun before 6W,and as the moon stablished in heaven ; and how 
Ps. 89 " 

96.37. is it they feel no awe about the text, From the womb, before 

Ps. no, tJte star of dawn I beyat thee : and again, He shall endure 
P s 72 with the sun, and before the moon, from generation to yene- 
5. Sept. ration Y To apply these things to a man, argues a mind 
utterly and entirely insensible. 

3. But let the Jews, since they so will, be troubled with 
their accustomed sickness, and disbelieve these and such like 
Scriptures ; but let us embrace the godly doctrine of the 
Faith, worshipping one God, the Father of Christ. For it 
Z- were profane indeed, when He has given unto all the prerogative 
of parents, to deny to Him the like. And let us believe in One 
God the Father, that even before proceeding to treat of 
" ! Christ, our previous discourse concerning the Father, may lay 

deeply in your hearts, not retard, faith in the Only -begotten. 
(3.) 4. For the name of the Father, in its very utterance implies 
the Son: as in like manner to name the Son, is at once to 
imply the Father also. For if He is a Father, plainly the 
Father of a Son ; and if a Son, plainly the Son of a Father. 
Therefore, lest when we say, We believe, " in one God, the 
Father Almighty ; Maker of Heaven and Earth ; and of all 
things visible and invisible, and then add, " and in One Lord 
Jesus Christ," it should be irreverently thought, that the 
Only -begotten is second in rank to heaven and earth, there 
fore before naming them, we named God, the Father ; that as 
soon as we think of the Father, we may also think of the 
Son, for between the Son and the Father no being whatever 
comes. 

5. God then, though He is in an improper sense the 
Father of many things, yet by nature and in truth is Father 
of One only, the Only -begotten Son our Lord, Jesus Christ: 
not becoming so in course of time, but being from everlasting 
the Father of the Only -begotten ; not first without Son, and 
then becoming a Father, by a change of purpose ; but before 
i- all substance, and all intelligence, before times and all ages, 
hath God the prerogative of Father; and more honoured 



The / other (f( /irixf, f/ic, God of the Old Jcstunwuf. 81 

in this than in all the rest. A father, not by passion, not by -Vw, 
union, not in ignorance, not by effluence, not by diminution. 
not bv alteration 6 : fox every perfect f/ift is from above , 



anneth dmrn from. tlic Father of li&lt;j/tts, /////&gt; whom is no j 



tt( j i(/t&lt;&gt;r v/Hfdoir of Infinity, lie is a perfect 
Father of a perfect Son: who has delivered every thing to 
Him who is begotten ; (for all thitKjs, He saith, are delivered MM. n, 
in M&lt;&gt; of My Fat/iff :) and is honoured of the Only-begotten ; 
For I hum HI r Mi/ Ftith;*r, saith the Son: and again, Even ^A- John 8, 
/ h&lt;m&gt; kcnt Mil Father*)* commandments* and abide in His . 

y John 15, 

love. Therefore we say like the Apostle ; Blessed be God, 10. 
,i t/i&lt;&gt; Father &lt;&gt;/ our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of* Cor. 

1 O 

mercies and God of (ill consolation ; and ice bow our knees ^^ 3 
unto t/i&lt;&gt; Father, of whom the whole family in heaven and l *- ] 5- 
earth ix ntniK tl, glorifving Him with the Only-begotten: forT oy ~ v K ; r 
he who denieth the Father, denieth the Son also: and x$. of 
again, lie who confesseth the Son, hath also the Father jj c. 
knowing that ./r-v//,v Christ is Lord to t/t&lt; j ylory- of God M&lt;? addedin 



_ , j rcc 

* at/ " f 1 John 2, 

&lt;&gt;. We worship then the Father of Christ, the Maker of 22. 23. 
Heaven and Earth, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob ; n 
to whose honour the former temple also, over against us, was 
built in this place ; without toleration of the Heretics, who 
sever the Old from the New Testament, and in submission to 
Christ, who says of the temple, Wist ye not that I must be Luke 2, 
in Mi/ /&gt;///// v .v i &gt;!&lt;&lt; / and again, Take these things hence ; *?: 2 
inn! in&lt;ik&lt;&gt; nut My Father s house an house of merchandise ; 16. 
which are plain avowals that the former temple in Jerusalem 
is His own Father s house. But if any one is so unbelieving 
;i^ t&gt; require yet more proofs of the Father of Christ being 
the Maker of the World ; let him attend to these words 
of his, in addition ; Arc not two s/mi rows sold for a fart/nay / Mat. 10, 

&lt;&gt;/ i/H in s/nill )) &lt;&gt;t fall to the y round without My\ 
irhirh /.v in heawn. And, Behold the fowls of the 



TOU 

b Those ideas were introduced by the ter to his Church : al7b&lt; rigftwvffi xiyuv, tv 

heretics ot the Gnostic and Manichsean on p.* KO.TO, rot &lt;rui au^.u.Tia t rcid* Xiyoi vois. In 

si-hiM.U, and iiiiputt d hy the Arians to TO opoouo-iov, OUT euv xara 2/a/gt&lt;r/ eS-n rec. text 

tht- Cuiliolir doctrine, and especially to KKTO. tiva. ixoropw tx. TOV cra^of tiro- oi\iv rov 

the word tpttuatt*. Accordingly, expla- o-rrW p^rt ya.^ tuvao-fat g-rjv ai/ Aov xa/ Tar^f 

nati..: a \vere -iveiion the subject at the voi^av xa/ KtrupoiTov &lt;pt&lt;riv, ruftetnxo* ri vpZv, 

Council of Niccea; M e.g. Constmntime *, *M tt {,&lt;p ,&lt;rra&lt;rt*t x. v. x. Socr. Hist, without 
which is thus reported in Eust .-bins * let- i. 8. your Fa- 

ther. 



82 Two senses of the word Father. 

LECT. air : for they sow not, neither gather into barns, and your 
heavenly Father feedeth them. And, My Father worketh 



Mat. 6 

26. hitherto, and I work. 

John 5, 7 But in case any one, whether from simplicity, or perverse 
(4.) ingenuity, suppose Christ to be but equal in honour to righ- 

John20,teous men, from His saying, I ascend to My Father, and your 
Father, it is well first to lay down, that though the Name of 
Father is one, its meaning is manifold. As understanding 
this, He said without hesitation, I go to My Father, and your 
Father : not saying, To our Father ; but making a distinction, 
and using at first in its proper meaning, to My Father, 
which was by nature, and then adding, and your Father, 
which was by adoption. For though we have been allowed 
to say without qualification in our prayers, "Our Father, 
which art in Heaven," this is a privilege from God s loving- 
kindness. For we do not call Him Father, because we were 
by nature begotten of the " Father which is in Heaven:" 
but having been translated from bondage to adoption, by the 
Father s grace, through the Son and the Holy Ghost, we are 
by ineffable loving-kindness allowed thus to speak. 

8. And if any wishes to learn, how we call God, Father, 
let him hear Moses, the most excellent of elementary teachers; 

Deut. Is not He thy Father, he says, that hath bought thee? 

32 6&lt; Hath He not made thee, and established thee ? And Esaias 

is. 64, 8. the prophet; But now, O Lord, Thou art our Father: we 

are the clay, and we all are the work of Thy hand. In the 

plainest way has the Prophetic gift shewn, that not by 

nature, but of God s grace, and by adoption, we call Him 

Father. 

9. Let Paul too explain to thee still more certainly, that in 
Holy Scriptures, it is not by any means the father according to 
the flesh only, who is called father ; for he says, For though 

1 Cor. ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not 

A. 1 ^ 

many fathers ; for, in Christ Jesiis have I begotten you 
through the Gospel. For not by begetting them according to 
the flesh, but in teaching and begetting them again according 
to the Spirit, was Paul the Father of the Corinthians. Again, 
consider Job s words, / was a father to the poor. For he 
29 named himself a father, not as having begotten them all, but 
as taking care of them. And the Only-begotten Son of God 



KOLTOt, 



The Son and Holy Ghost alone see the Father. 

Himself, when at His crucifixion, His flesh was nailed to the 
tree, seeing Mary His mother according to the flesh, and 
John His dearest disciple, says to him, Behold thy mother; Johnl9, 
and to her, Behold thy son: teaching her the parental" 
affection due to him, and indirectly explaining that which is 
said in Luke, and Hi.* father and His mother marvelled at Luke 2, 
Him : words which heretical schools catch at, as if He were w v^ 
begotten of a man and a woman. For like as Mary was ^A , 

received 

called the mother of John, from her parental affection to him, tex t;but 
not from having given him birth: so was Joseph called ^ e SS*" 
father of Christ, not as being really so, (for he knew her not, reads as 

f~* "1 

says the Gospel, //// she had brought forth her first-born Son,} ^- 

JVJat. 1, 
but on account of his care in nurturing Him. 25. 

10. Thus much then, in the way of a digression, to put you 
in remembrance. However, I will add yet another text in 
proof that God is called the father of men, but in an improper 
sense. Considering Isaiah says to God, Thou art our Father, is. 63, 

1 f\ * A 

though Abraham be ignorant of us; and Sara travailed not ^ ^ ^ 
with us, is it necessary to pursue the enquiry ? And when the 
Psalmist says, Tltey shall be troubled from His countenance, Ps.67,6. 
the Father of the fatherless, and Judge of the widows, is it.^ ^x 
not evident at once to all, that when God is called the 
Father of orphans who have lately lost their own fathers, He 
is thus named, not as having begotten them of Himself, but 
as tending and shielding them ? Of men, then, He is, in an 
improper sense, the Father, as has been said : but only of 
Christ the Father by nature and not by adoption : moreover, 
of men in time, but of Christ before all time, as Christ Him 
self says, A fid now, O Father, glorify Thou Me with Thine John 17, 
own self, with the glory which I had with Thee before the 5 
world wv/.v. 

11. We believe then in One God the Father, the Unsearch- (5.) 
able, and the Ineffable: whom none of men hath seen, 



Only-begotten hath declared Him: for He which is of 18 
God, He hath seen the Father: whose countenance the 46. 
Angels continually behold, yet behold, according to the Ma *. i8 
measure of their respective orders ; but the undimmed vision 
of the Father is reserved in its purity for the Son with the 
Holy Ghost. 

12. At this point, recollecting what I have been just saying 

G 2 



84 God our Father through adoption and our own choice. 

LECT. concerning God being called the Father of men, I am greatly 
amazed at men s insensibility, For while God has with un 



speakable loving-kindness deigned to be called their Father,- 
He in heaven, they upon earth ; He the Maker of Eternity, 
Is. 40, they the production of time ; He who lioldetli tlie earth hi 
v. r 22 ^ ie hH w of His hand, they upon the earth as grcushoppergfd 
yet man, having forsaken his heavenly Father, has said 1o a 

Jer. 2, stocky Thou art mil father; tniil to n xtinie, Thon hast brought 

*27 

we forth ; and methinks, for this cause the Psalmist says to 

Ps. 45, human nature, Forget aho thine own people, and thy father s 
house, whom thou hast chosen for thy father, whom thou hast 
coveted, to thv destruction. 

i 

13. And not only stocks and stones, but even Satan himself, 

some have ere now chosen for their father, even the destroyer 

John 8, of souls : these men the Lord thus reproves, Ye do the deed* 

of your father ; that is, of the devil, who is the father of men, 

not by nature, but by deceit ; for like as Paul for his godly 

l Cor. teaching was called the father of the Corinthians, thus also 
4 15 

the devil is called the father of those who of their own choice 

Ps. 50, consent u ith him. For they are not to be tolerated who 

1 Q 

1 John P ervert tne text, By this ice know the children of God, and 
3, 10. the children of the devil, as if by a law of nature some among 

/ V tf 

nien were to be saved, and some to perish: whereas neither 
do we come to such holy sonship of necessity, but of choice ; 
the rec. nor was ^ by nature that the traitor Judas was the son of 
text, ix t ne devil and of perdition : else he would never at all have 

. 

cast out devils in the name of Christ, for Satan casteth not 



TOVTta 



l ri&gt; tn out Satan ; nor on the other hand would Paul have turned 

this are 

manifest. from persecuting to preaching the Gospel; but the adoption 
avrt^au- { s a t our choice, as saith John, But as nnunj as received Him, 
John l * M iem 9 ave He power to become the sons of God, even to 
12. them that believe in His name. For not before faith, but 

from faith, we of our own choice have been counted worthy 

to become the sons of God. 

(6.) 14. Knowing this then, let us walk spiritually, that we 
Rom. 8, may be counted worthy of God s adoption: for as many as 

are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For 

it avails us nought to possess the name of Christians, unless 
John 8, the works follow ; lest to us also the words apply, // ye were 

Abraham s children, ye would do the works of Abraham. 



Duty of honouring and obeying our earthly parents. 85 

For if we call on the Father ; who without respect of person 1 Pet. l 

to every man s work, let us pass the time of 



our sojourning here in fear ; not loving the world, neither the \ John 
I/tings that are in the world ; for if any man love the world, 
the love of the Father is not in him. Therefore, my beloved 
children, let us offer glory to our Father which is in heaven, 
through our works: that they may see our good works, awe? Mat. 5, 



glorify on r Father which is in heaven ; casting all our care ^ p et 5 
Hi in : for our Father knoweth what thinqs ice have 7. 

Mat. 6, 
of. 8. 

15. And while we honour our Heavenly Father, let us also (7.) 
honour the fathers of our flesh : since the Lord hath evidently Heb.12, 
go appointed in the Law and the Prophets, saying, Honour Q - 
thy father and thy mother, that it may be well with thee, and 20, 12. 
My days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God 
gicct/i thee. This command claims especial attention from 
those here present, who actually have fathers and mothers. 
Children, obey your parents in all things, for this is we II Col 3, 
pleasing to the Lord. For the Lord said not, He who loveth M ^ t&lt; 10 
father or mother is not worthy of Me, lest thou shouldest37. 
from ignorance understand badly a good word, but added, more 
than Me. For when our fathers upon earth have views at 
variance with those of our Father which is in heaven, then 
we must obey this word : when, however, not hindered by 
them in respect of godliness, but from want of affectionate 
feeling, and forgetfulness of their benefits to us, we despise 
them, then that rracle will have place, which saith, He 



* 

TOUTOVS 



rt/w//t father or mother, let him die the death. } 1 7- 

Mat. 15, 

16. The first virtuous observance in a Christian is, to 4. 
honour his parents, to requite their troubles, and with all 
his might to provide for their comfort: (for though 
sliould iviKiv them ever so much, yet we never can be what 

1 * 

they have been to us:) so that they enjoying comfort of our 
providing, may establish us in blessings, which Jacob the 
su])|&gt;lanter knew the value of, when he appropriated them : ^ ?"- 
and that our Heavenly Father approving our virtuous course, ;,,. 
may count us worthy to shine with the just as the sun, in the^^. 13, 
kii&gt;g:?u)n of our Father: to whom be glory, with the Only- 43 
begotten, our Saviour Jesus Christ, with the Holy and life- 
giving Spirit, now and ever, to all etemity. Amen. 



LECTURE VIII. 

ON THE SOVEREIGNTY OF GOD 8 . 



JER. xxxii. 18, 19. 

The Great, the Mighty God ; the Lord of Hosts is His Name, 
great in counsel, and mighty in work. 

LECT. 1. BY belief " in One God," we utterly eradicate the mis- 
belief in many gods, using it as a. weapon against the Greeks, 



and every opposing power of heretics : and by adding, " in One 
God the Father," we oppose those of the circumcision, who 
deny the Only -begotten Son of God. For, as I said yester 
day, even before we speak plainly concerning our Lord Jesus 
Christ, yet by our speaking of God the Father, we have 
already implied that He is the Father of a Son ; that as we 
understand that God is, so we may understand that He has 
a Son. Now we add to this, that He is also " Almighty ;" 
and that, because of Greeks and Jews together, and all 
heretics. 

2. For some of the Greeks have said that God is the soul 
of the world. Others again, that His power reaches only to 
heaven, but not to the earth as well. And some, going into 

Ps.36,5. the same error, and perverting the text which says, And Thy 

faithfulness unto the clouds, have dared to bound Gcd s 

providence by the limits of the clouds and the heaven, and to 

despoil God of the things on earth; forgetting that Psalm 

Ps. 139, which saith, Jf I ascend into heaven, Thou art there ; if I go 
down to hell, Thou art there. For if nothing is higher than 
heaven, and if hell is deeper than earth, He who is master of 
the lower regions, must reach the earth also. 



* Eis T, navrflxgarofa, Omnipoten- and English versions of the Creed. 
fern* or Almighty, according to the Latin 



God has dominion over idolaters, heretics, and the devil 87 

3. And heretics again, as was said before, acknowledge not 
One Almighty God. for He is Almighty, whose might is 

r nil things, who has power over all things. But they who 
My that there is one God, the Lord of the soul, and another the 
Lord of the body, make neither of them perfect, because each 
lacks what the other has. For how is he Almighty, who has 
power over the soul, but not over the body ? or how is he 
Almighty, who being the Lord of bodies, has no power over 
spirits ? But the Lord confutes these men, saying on the con 
trary, Rather fear ye Him which is able to destroy Loth body 
and soul in hell: for unless the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ had power over both, how should He subject both to 
punishment? for how shall He be able to take what is 
another s, and cast it into hell, except Hejirst bind the strong Mat. 12, 
wan, and spoil MS yoods f 

4. But according to Holy Scripture, and the doctrines of (2.) 
truth, there is but One God, who has dominion over all things 

by His power, and suffers many things of His will. For He 
has dominion even over the idolaters, but He suffers them of 
His forbearance ; and over even the heretics who deny Him, 
but He suffers them of His patience; over the devil too, but 
He suffers with him, of His patience, not from want of power, 
as if foiled. He is the commencement of the Lord s creation , Job 40 
bciny nia.dc to be mocked, not by Himself, (that were unsuit-^ 19. 
able,) but by the Angels whom He has made : and He has y ll ^ s lish 
permitted him to live, for two objects ; that his defeat might 
increase his infamy, and that men might be crowned. All- 
wise providence of, God ! by which a wicked purpose is con 
verted into a means of salvation for the faithful. For as He 
took the unbrothc-rly purpose of Joseph s brethren as the 
groundwork of His own scheme, and after suffering them to 

11 their brother, from hatred, took occasion thereby to give 
him the kingdom whom He would ; so He suffers the devil to 
wivstlr with us, that they who conquer him may be crowned, 
ami that upon the victory, he may have worse shame, as 
conquered by the weaker, and men greater glory, as conquer 
ing one who was once Archangel. 

5. Nothing then is excepted from the range of God s 
power, for Scripture says of Him, For all things serve Thee.Ps. 119, 
One and all serve Him; yet in this number His One Only 91 



88 Goods ufthis tcorld ((re really good, only evil in their use. 

LCT. Son, and His One Holy Ghost, are not included; all things 
^ UI which are His servants, rather serve their Lord through the 



One Son and in the Holv Ghost. God therefore has domi- 



nion over all things, and endures of His long-suffering even 

murderers, robbers, and fornicators; having appointed a set 

duv for recompensing every one, that they may incur heavier 

sentence, if after a longer respite they have still impenitent 

John 19, hearts. Earthly rulers are kings of men, yet not so without 

power from above. And this Nebuchadnezzar knew by 

Dan. 4, proof, when he said, Bis dominion is an everlasting donti- 

ttion, &lt;nid ///.v kingdom is from generation to generation. 
(3.) (&gt;. Riches, gold and silver, are not, as some think, the devil s 
I Vov. 17, property ; for the whole world q/ riches is the faithful man s, 
but not 1jt( t 1h (&gt; unbelieving hath no pence: and nothing is more re- 
accord- moved from faith than the devil. Also God saith plainly by the 
theAlex- Pro])het, The silrer is Mine and the gold is Mine; and his, to 
andnan u -] t0 ntsoerer I frill (jive it. Do thou but use it well, and 
Hag. 2, there will be nothing to condemn in silver ; but when thou 
Luke 4 uses ^ a gd thing ill, then, not choosing to blame thy 
6. management of it, thou impiously blamest its Maker. A man 
Mat. 25, may even be justified by means of opulence. / was an hnn- 
gred, nnd ye gave me meat; that is, from being opulent; 
/ was naked ) and ye clothed we ; that is, by being opulent; 
Mat. 19, nay, wouldest thou be told that riches may become a door 
of the kingdom of heaven ? Sell, He says, that fhott hast, 
and give to the poor, and thou shall hare treasure in 
heaven. 

7. Now I have made these remarks because of those 

heretics, who lay possessions, and riches, and the body under 

a curse : for I wish thee neither to be a slave to riches, nor 

yet to treat as enemies what is given thee of God to use. 

Never then say, that riches are the devil s: for though he say, 

Mat 4, All these things will I give Thee, for they are delivered unto 

4 6 J e me, yet one may even deny the assumption ; for we must not 

believe the lying spirit. Perhaps however, compelled by the 

pow^er of His presence, he spake the truth ; for he said not, 

" All these things will I give Thee, because they are mine," 

but " because they have been delivered unto me." For he 

grasped not at the lordship of them, but he professed to have 

them in a certain sense committed to him, and to dispense 



Heretics have denied God s omnipotence. 89 

them. However, this point concerning his speaking truth or 
not, deserves consideration of expositors at a lit time h . 

8. There is then one God the Father, the Almighty, whom 

the tribe of heretics have dared to blaspheme; yea, they 

lave dared to blaspheme the Lord of Sabaoth, who sitteth 

above the Cherubim; they have dared to blaspheme the 

sovereign Lord; they have dared to blaspheme Him who 

^ted on the Prophets, the Almighty God. But thou, 
worship One, the Almighty God, the Father of our Lord 
.lesus Christ. Fly from the error of many Gods ; fly from all 
heresy, and say with Job, / will call upon the Almighty Job 5, 8. 
Lord, who doeth great things and unsearchable, glorious ept * 
//n i/f/x tottl marvellous, without number; and For all these Job 37, 
things, is honour from the Almighty, to whom be glory for vil j 
ever and ever. 

b The Fathers speak as if the Devil him over it against his Maker, seducing 

\srreoriginallytheheadofthatorderof man into idolatry, &c. Vid. Nyssen 

Angels to whom the administration of Orat. Catech. 6. Basil, Horn. 9. . 10. 

this world was committed. On sinning, Damasc. de fid. Orth. ii. 4. Ed. Be- 

he made use of what power was left to ned. 



LECTURE IX. 

ON GOD, THE CREATOR OF ALL THINGS. 



JOB xxxviii. 2, 3. 

Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge ? 
Gird up now thy loins like a man : for I will demand ofthee, 
and answer thou Me. 

LECT. 1. WITH the eyes of the flesh it is impossible to behold 

- God ; for the incorporeal cannot be subject to fleshly sight, 

and the Only-begotten Son of God Himself hath testified, 

John 1, saying, No man hath seen God at any time. Should how 
ever any one, from a passage in Ezekiel, understand, that 
EzeYelsaw Him, let him inquire what that Scripture says; 

Ezek. i, He saw the likeness of the glory of the Lord, not the Lord 
Himself; nay, the likeness of His glory, not the glory itself, 
as it is in truth ; and beholding only the likeness of the glory, 
he fell to the earth with fear. But if the sight of the likeness 
of the glory, and not of the glory itself, wrought fear and 
distress in the prophets, any one who should attempt to 
behold God Himself, would to a certainty lose his life, 

Exod. according to the text, There shall no man sec Me and live. 

Wherefore, of His exceeding loving-kindness, God has 

spread out the heaven to be the veil of His proper Godhead, 

It. 64, i. lest we perish: this is not my word, but the prophet s, If 

&gt;eptt thou shouldest open the heavens, trembling would take hold 
of the mountains from thee, and they ivould melt airay. 
And what wonder if Ezekiel, seeing the similitude of the 

Vid. glory, fell down ? since Daniel, when Gabriel the servant of 

8 10 the Lord appeared, straightway shuddered and fell on his 

face, and, prophet as he was, dared not answer him, until 

the Angel turned himself into the likeness of a son of man. 

For if the sight of Gabriel wrought trembling in the prophets, 



Cn*l .sent only ut His irorks, accordiny to the measure of each. 91 

luul (Joel Himself appeared according as He is, would they 
not all have perished ? 

2. The Divine Nature then with the eyes of the flesh we (2.) 
cannot see, but from the Divine works we may obtain some 
idea of His power; according to the saying of Solomon, /brWisd. 
by 1h&lt;&gt; &lt;jreahn*ss and beauty of the creatures, proportion ably 

lite Maker of them is see)). For he says not that from the 
creatures, the Maker is seen, but hath added, " proportionably ;" 
for so much the greater does God appear to each, as the man 
hath attained a large survey of the creatures ; and when by 
that large survey his soul is raised aloft, he gains a more 
excellent conception of God. 

3. Wouldest thou know that the nature of God is incom 
prehensible? The Three Children, singing praises to God in 

the fiery furnace, say, Blessed art Thou that beholdest the Song 3 

s, and sitlt xt upon the Cherubim. Tell me the nature dre l Q)32 . 
&gt;f the Cherubim, and then look upon Him who sitteth upon 
And yet Ezekiel the prophet has made a description 



&gt;f them, as far as could be; saying, that every one had fourVicL ^ 
faces, the face of a man, and of a lion, and of an eagle, and 6 . ^ i . 
of a calf; and that every one had six wings, and eyes on &c - 

very side, and under each a wheel with four parts; yet 
though the prophet has so described, we are not yet able, 
even if we read it, to comprehend it. But if we cannot 
comprehend the throne which the prophet has declared, how 
shall we be able to comprehend Him who sits upon it, the 
Invisible and Ineffable God ? Curiously to scan the nature 
of God is impossible ; but we are able to offer glory to Him 
from His works that are seen. 

4. These things I say to you because of what comes next 
in the Creed, and because we say, " We believe in One God, 
the Father Almighty, Maker o&lt; heaven and earth, and of all 
things both Visible and Invisible;" that we may remember 
that tin- same is both the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and the Maker of heaven and earth, and thus secure our- 
sclves against the bye paths of ungodly heretics, who have 
dared to speak evil of the All-wise Artificer of all this world, 
,ni(l who, though they see with the eyes of the flesh, are 
blinded in the eyes of their mind. 

5. For what fault have they to find in this, the greatest of 



92 Wonders of the heaven, stars, and sun. 

LECT. the works of God r Truly thev ought to have been struck 

IX * * 

^- dumb, when they viewed the vaultings of the heavens, and 



worshipped Him who has reared the sky as an arch, who out 
of the fluid waters has made the immoveable substance of the 
Gen. l, heaven^. For God said, Let there be a firmament in the 
iniii^t / the irntfrx. God spake once, and it stood last, and 
does not fall. The sky is water, and those orbs in it. sun, 
moon, and stars are of fire ; and how run those fiery bodies 
in the water ? But tf any one is perplexed, from fire and 
water being of such opposite natures, let him remember the 
fire which in Egypt in the time of Moses flamed in the hail. 
Let him also behold the all-wise workmanship of God ; for 
since there would be need of water, for tilling the earth, 
He made the heaven above of water, that when the region 
of the earth should require watering by means of showers, 
the heaven from its own nature might be ready for this 
purpose. 

&lt;;. What : is there not much to wonder at in the sun, which 
being small to look on, contains in it an intensity of power, 
appearing from the east, and shooting his light even to the 
west. The Psalmist describes his rising at dawn, when he 
l s.19,5. says, ll hich is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber. 
This is a description of his pleasant and comely array on first 
appearing to men ; for when he rides at high noon we are 
wont to flee from his blaze ; but at his rising he is welcome 
to all, as a bridegroom to look on. Behold also how he pro 
ceeds; (or rather not he, but one who has by His bidding 
determined his course ;) how in summer time aloft in the 
heavens, he finishes off longer days, giving men due time 
for their works ; while in winter he straitens his course, 1- 
the day s cold last too long, and that the nights lengthening, 
may conduce both to the rest of men, and to the fruitfulness 
of the earth s productions. And see likewise in what order 
the days correspond to each other, in summer increasing, in 
winter diminishing, but in spring and autumn affording one 
another an uniform length ; and the nights again in like 
Ps.19,2. manner. And as the Psalmist saith concerning them, Day 
unto day uttereth speech, and uiaht unto night sheweth 
knowledge. For to the heretics, who have no ears, they 
almost shout aloud, and by their order say, that there is no 



Wonders of the du/ and nltjht. 

other God save their Maker and the appointer of their 
hounds, Him who laid out the universe. 

7. No one must tolerate such as say, that the Maker of 
light is different from the Maker of darkness; for let a man 
remember Isaiah s words, I the Lord form the liyht an&lt;n*.^,~ 

,it( dtirknex*. Whv, O man, art thou offended with these? 

* . - . 

Whv so aiinoved at the time of rest given thee ? The 



servant would not have gained it from his masters, but tor 
the darkness bringing a necessary respite. And often, after 
toiling in the day. how are we refreshed by nights; and he who 
was yesterday amid labours, starts in the morning vigorous 
from a night s re&gt;t ? And what more conduces to religious 
wisdom than the night, when oftentimes we bring before us 
the tilings of God, and read and contemplate the Divine 
Oruclrs ? when too is our mind more alive for Psalmody and 
Praver than at myrht : When does a recollection oftener come 

% 

over us of our sins than at night: Let us not then be per 
verse enough to entertain the notion, that another besides (iod 
is the Maker of darkness; for experience shews that darkness 
^ood and most useful. 

8. Those persons ought to have felt astonishment and 
admiration, not only at the sun and moon, but also at the 
well-ordered choirs of the stars, their unimpeded courst &, 
their respective risings in due season; and how some are the 
signs of summer, others of winter, and how some mark the 
time of sowing, others introduce the season of sailing. And 
man sitting in his ship, and sailing on the boundless waves, 
looks at the stars and steers his vessel. Well says Scripture 
concerning these bodies Let then) be for \/////.x\ and for ,svwx,&lt;;;/.v, Gen. 1, 
and for dtii/*, and for yatrs ; not for star-ga/ings, and vain 
tales of nativities. Observe, too, how considerately He imparts 

the daylight by a gradual growth ; for the sun does not rise 
upon us, while \\ e ga/e, all at once, but a little light runs up 
before him, that bv previous trial our eve-ball mav bear his 



stronger ray: and again, how He has cheered the darkness of 
night by the gleam of moonlight. 

V. ll /io is the father of the rain; and icho htith yiren (5.) 
birth to the drop* nf doc . Who hath condensed the air into ;{? b 38 
cloud.x. and bid them carry the fluid mass of showers, at one" 

time brimjinii front the north (/olden elouds, at another, Job 37. 

2-2. Sept. 



94 Wonders of the clouds, rain, and mow, of flowers and trees. 

LECT. giving these a uniform appearance, and then again curling them 
up into festoons and other figures manifold ? Who can number 



Job 38, 

37. the clouds in wisdom ? of which Job saith, He knoiceth ihe 

Job 37, balancings vf the clouds, and hath bent do ten the hearen to 

16. Sept. 

Job 38, * ne earth ;; and, He who ninnbereth the clouds in wisdom) 
37. Sept. a nd, The cloud is not rent under them. For though measures 



* 



of water ever so many weigh upon the clouds, yet they are not 
8. rent; but with all order come down upon the earth. Who 
Ps. 135, brings the winds out of His treasuries? Who, as just now 
38,28. said, lialli tjircn birth to the drops of dew? Out of whose 



iromb cometh forth 1he ice. watery in its substance, but like 

wo- . . 

fretfis stone in properties. And at one time the water becomes 
" V"*~ snow like wool, at another, it ministers to Him who scat- 

yiiet. 

Ps. 147, fers the hoar-frost like ashes; at another it is changed into 
a strong substance, since He fashions the water as He will. 
Its nature is uniform, its properties manifold. Water, in the 

Ps. 104, vines is wine, which nniketh &lt;jlad the heart of man ; and 
in the olives oil, to make his face to shine; and is further 
transformed into bread, irhich strengthened man s heart, and 
into all kinds of fruits. 

10. For such wonders was the great Artificer to be blas 
phemed ? or rather to be worshipped ? And after all 1 have 
not yet spoken of that part of Plis wisdom which is not seen. 
Contemplate the spring, and the flowers of all kinds, in all 
their likeness still diverse from one another: the deep crimson 
of the rose, and the exceeding whiteness of the lily. They 
come of one and the same rain, one and the same earth ; who 
has distinguished, who has formed them ? Now do consider 
this attentively: the substance of the tree is one, part is for 
shelter, part for this or that kind of fruit; and the Artificer is 
One. The vine is one, and part of it is for fuel, part for 
shoots, and part for leaves, and part for tendrils, part for 
clusters. Again, how wondrously thick are the knots which 
run round the reeds, as the Artificer hath made them ! Out 
of the one earth come creeping things, and wild beasts, and 
cattle, and trees, and food, and gold, and silver, and brass, 
and iron, and stone. Water was but one nature ; yet of it 
comes the life of things that swim, and of birds ; and as 
the one swim in the waters, so also ihe birds fly in the 
air. 



Wonders of fishes, birds, beasts, and insects. 95 

1 1. And this (/ret/ f and tride sea, in it are things creeping (6.) 
innumerable. Who can tell the beauty of the fishes that arePs. 104, 

25 

therein? Who can describe the greatness of the whales; and 



the nature of its amphibious animals ? how they live both on - 
dry land and in the waters? Who can tell the depth and* 
breadth of the sea, or the force of its enormous waves ? Yet it 

stavs within its boundaries, because of Him who said, Hitherto Job 38, 

1 1 
shaft thnn come and no further ; and here shall thy proud 

ifdiw be stayed. And to shew the decree imposed on it, 
when it runs up on the land, it leaves a plain line on the 
sands by its waves ; declaring, as it were, to those who see 
it, that it has not passed its appointed bounds. 

12. Who can understand the nature of the fowls of the air? 
how some have with them a voice of melody ; and others 
have their wings enriched with all manner of painting ; and 
others soaring on high, stay motionless in the midst of the 

skv, as the hawk. For by the Divine command the hawk Job 39, 

9fi &lt;? t 

haring spread out her wings, stays motionless, looking doirn 
toward* the south. Who of men can behold the eagle ? But 
if thou canst not read the mystery of birds when soaring on 
high, how wouldest thou read the Maker of all things ? 

13. Who among men knows even the names of all wild 
beasts : or who can accurately classify their natures ? But 
if we know not even their bare names, how shall we compre 
hend their Maker ? The command of God was but one, which 
said, Let the earth bring forth wild beasts and cattle andGeu.], 
creeping things after their kinds; and distinct natures sprung 25 * Sept " 
from one voice at one command, the gentle sheep, and 

the carnivorous lion, also the various instincts of irrational 
creatures, as representations of the various characters of men. 
The 1\ is an emblem of men s craftiness, and the snake of & 
friend s envenomed treachery, and the neighing horse of wan ton j er . 5, 8. 
young men, and that busy ant, to arouse the sluggish and 
the dull; for when a man passes his youth idly, then he is 
instructed by the irrational creatures, being reproved by that 
Scripture what saith, Go to the ant, thou sluggard, consider Prov. 6, 
her trays and be wise ; for when thou beholdest her in due 6 

son treasuring up food for herself, do thou copy her, and 
treasure up for thyself the fruits of good works for the world 

to come. And again. Go to the bee, and learn how industrious Prov.6, 

8. Sept. 






96 Wonders &lt;&gt;J % man s nature. 

LECT. she is; how hovering about all kinds of flowers, she culls 

the honey f&gt;r thy use, that thou also ranging over Holy 

Scripture mayest lay hold on thy salvation, and being satis- 

Ps. 119, fied with it mayest say, How sweet are thy icords nnto my 

the ho- ta-ste) yea sweeter than honey and the honeycomb to my 

neycornb, DiontJl . 

in He- 14. Is not the Artificer then rather worthy to be glorified : 
For what if thou know not the nature of every thing? aiv 
the things therefore, which He has made, without their use? 
For canst thou know the efficacy of all herbs ? or canst thou 
learn all the advantage which comes of every animal ? Even 
from poisonous adders have come antidotes for the preserv 
ation of men. But thou wilt say to me, " The snake is 
terrible," fear thou the Lord, and it shall not be able to hurt 
thee ; " The scorpion stings," fear thou the Lord, and it 
shall not sting thee ; " The lion is blood-thirsty," fear thou 
the Lord, and he shall lie down beside thee, as by Daniel. 
And, truly, there is whereat to wonder, in the power even of 
the creatures ; how some, as the scorpion, have their weapon 
in a sting, while the power of others is in their teeth, and 
others again get the better by means of hoofs, and the basi 
lisk s might is his gaze. Thus from this varied workmanship, 
think of the Artificer s power. 

15. But these things perchance thou art not acquainted 
with ; thou hast nothing in common with the creatures which 
are without thee. Now then enter into thyself, and consider 
the Artificer of thine own nature. What is there to find fault 
with in the framing of thy body ? Master thine own self, and 
there shall nothing evil proceed from any of thy members. 
At the first, Adam in paradise was without clothing, as was 
Eve, but it was not because of aught that he was, that he 

\ \ v 

uixn. was cas t out; nought that we are then is the cause of sin, 

oT^v^i-but they who abuse what they are : but the Maker is wise. 

" Who hath prepared the recesses of the womb for childbear- 

ing ? Who hath given life to the lifeless thing within it ? 

Job 10, Who hath fenced us with sinews and bones, and clothed us 

?r//// fikin and Jlesh, and soon as the babe is bom, brings 

forth fountains of milk out of the breasts? And how doth the 

babe grow to be a child, and the child to be a youth, and 

then to be a man ; and is again changed into an old man, no 



Lesson Uwijlit in tlwse irnnili fx. 97 

one the while discerning exactly each day s change? How 
also does part of our food become blood, while another part 
is separated for the draught, and another is changed into 
flesh ? Who is it who gives its never ceasing motion to the 
heart ? Who hath wisely guarded the tenderness of the eyes 
with the fence of the eyelids ? for concerning the complicated 
and wonderful contrivance of the eyes scarcely do the ample 
rolls of physicians sufficiently inform us. Who also hath sent 
each breath we draw, through the whole body ? Thou seest, 
O man, the Artificer ; tliou seest the wise Contriver. 

1(&gt;. These things has my discourse dwelt on now, passing over (8.) 
many, yea innumerable, other matters, and especially things 
incorporeal and invisible, that on the one hand thou mayest 
abhor those who blaspheme that good and wise Artificer; 
and that on the other, from what has been spoken and read, 
and from what thou canst thyself find out or think of, thou 
mayest proportionally see the Creator by the greatness and vis. 1,3, 
beauty of the creations; and that bending the knee with 
godly reverence to the Maker of all things, tilings of sense 
and things of mind, visible and invisible, thou mayest with an 
honest and holy tongue, and with unwearied lips and heart, 

praises to God, saying, O Lord, hotc manifold are Thy p s . 104, 

in uisdom hast Tliou made them all: for to Thee 24 
belongeth honour and glory and greatness, both now and for 

r and ever. Amen. 



H 



LECTURE X. 

&lt;&gt;N THE ONE LORD, JESUS CHRIST. 



1 CORINTHIANS viii. 5, 6. 

For though there be that fire called gods, whether in heaven &lt; 
hi earth, (as there be god* many and lords many,} but to us 
there is One God the Father, of whom are all things, and 
we in Him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all 
things, and we by Him. 

LECT. 1. THEY who have been taught to believe in One God, the 
_ 5l_ Father Almighty, ought also to believe in His Only -begotten 
Uohn2, Son; for irhosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the 

OQ 

j Father. Jesus says, / am the Door; no one comet Ji nnto the 
9. 14,6. Father, but by Me. For if thou deny the Door, the knou- 



1 ledge concerning the Father is closed from thee. No man 
knoweth the Father, save the Son, and lie to whomsoever the 
Son will reveal Him ; for if thou deny Him who reveals, 
thou remainest in ignorance. There is a sentence in the 
John 3, Gospels to this effect, He who believeth not on the Son shall 
not see life, but the wrath of God abideth upon him: for the 
Father is wroth, when the Only-begotten Son is set at nought. 
It is a great matter to a king, if even one of his soldiers be 
but dishonoured ; and when it is one of his more honourable 
guards or friends, then his anger becomes yet greater; but 
if any offer outrage to the king s only-begotten son himself, 
who shall sooth the father, when wroth concerning his only- 
begotten son ? 

2. If then a man wishes to be religious towards God, let 
him worship the Son ; since otherwise the Father accepts not 
his service. The Father spake with a loud voice from heaven, 

Mat. 3, saving. This is My beloved Son, in ichom I am well-pleased; 
17. 



\ dines of the Only-begotten Son. 

the Father was well-pleased with the Son ; unless thou also 
be well-pleased in Him, thou hast not life. Be not inveigled 
hy the Jews, who craftily say, There is only One God; but 
together with the knowledge that God is one, know also that 
God has an Only-begotten Son. I am not the first to say 
this ; for the Psalmist in the person of the Son saith, The Ps. 2, 7. 
Lord hath said unto Me, Thou art My Son. Heed not therefore 
what the Jews say, but what the Prophets say. Wonderest 
thou that they who have stoned and slain the Prophets, set at 
nought their words ? 

3. Believe thou on One Lord Jesus Christ, the Only-be- (2). 
gotten Son of God. We say One Lord Jesus Christ, to signify 
that God s Son is Only-begotten ; we say, One, lest thou 
shouldest suppose another. We say, One, lest thou shouldest 
profanely disperse the many Names of power among many sons. 

For He is called a Door ; but take not the name literally for 
a thing of wood, but a spiritual, a living Door, discriminating Ay/xn r. 
those who enter in. He is called the Way; that is, not one John 14, 
trodden by men s feet, but one which guides us to the Father 6 * 
in heaven. He is called a Sheep ; not an irrational one, but Acts 8, 

QO 

the one, which through its precious blood, cleanses the world 
from its sins ; and when led before the shearer knew when Isa. 53,- 
to be silent. This Sheep, again, is called the Shepherd, who 
says, / am the good Shepherd; a Sheep by reason of HisJolmlo, 
manhood, a Shepherd on account of the loving-kindness of 
His Godhead. And dost thou wish to know whether there 
are spiritual sheep ? the Saviour says to the Apostles, Behold, *.vyt*. 
I send you us sheep in the midst of wolves. Again He is Mat&lt; 10 
called a Lion ; not a devourer of men, but as if shewing by R ev&lt; 5 5 
the title His princely and stedfast and resolute nature. Also 1*09*0,- 
He is called a Lion, in opposition to the lion who is our* 
adversary, who roars and devours those who have beempet.5, 
deceived. For the Saviour came, not as having laid aside 8 
the gentleness of His own nature, but as the mighty Lion of 
the tribe of Judak, to save them who believe, and to trample 
upon the adversary. He is called a Stone ; not a lifeless one, Ps. lie, 
quarried by men s hands : but the chief-corner stone, on whom Is 2 s 
whosoever believe th shall not be ashamed. 16. 

4. He is called Christ, the Anointed; not anointed by4_e. 
human hands, but having eternally from the Father an unction 

H 2 



100 Manifold offices of the Only -begotten 

LECT. to be High-priest, over man. He is called Dead; yet not as 
having his abode among the dead, as all they have who are in 

Ps.88,5. Hades, but being o\o\\efrco among the dead. He is called the 
Son of Man ; not as being born of the earth, as all we are, but 
as coming upon the clouds to judge the quick and dead. He 
is called Lord, not improperly as some men are, but as having 
a Lordship, natural and eternal. Fitly is He called Jesus, 

Mrtut. deriving His name from His salutary medicine. He is called 
a Son ; not advanced by adoption, but having been naturally 
begotten. And many are the titles of our Saviour; lest 
therefore Hi* manifold appellations should make thee think 
that there are many sons, and because of the errors of the 
heretics, who say that Christ is One, and Jesus another, and 
the Door another, and so on, the faith secures thee before 
hand, and says well, " In One Lord Jesus Christ;" for though 
the titles be many, their subject is one. 

(3.) 5. Now the Saviour shews Himself under various forms to 
each, for his profit. For to those who stand in need of 
rejoicing, He becomes a Vine ; to those who want to enter in, 
He is a Door ; to those who need to offer prayers, He stands 
a mediating High-Priest. Again, to those who have sins, 
He becomes a Sheep, that He may be sacrificed for them ; 

1 Cor. He becomes all things to (fit, remaining in His own nature 
what He is. For, continuing to hold the true unchangeable 
prerogative of Sonship, as some skilful physician or con 
siderate teacher, He adapts Himself to our weaknesses; 
though Very Lord, and not receiving the Lordship by ad 
vancement 8 , but having that dignity by nature ; not like us, 
improperly called Lord, but being so in verity ; since by the 

vit/&gt;&lt;tT&lt; Father s decree, He is Lord of His own works. For whereas 

/ 

our lordship is over men of like rights and like passions, nay, 
often our elders, and often a young master over aged serv 
ants, our Lord Jesus Christ s Lordship is not so ; but He is 
first Maker, then Lord ; first He made all things by the will 
of the F at h er) then, He is Lord over the things which He 
has made b . 



* IK rgfl*0Trif. This was the doctrine *&gt; It was a point of controversy in the 

of the Snmosatenes, Athan. de Syn. 26. early Church, (though of course not ne- 

. 4. and of the Arians, Alex, apud cessarily more than a verbal one,)whether 

Theod. Hist. i. 4. God, and Christ, could be called Lord, 



Christ was God before His Incarnation. 101 

6. Christ the Lord is He who was born in the city of Luke 2, 

11 
David. And wouldest thou know whether Christ is the / . 

Lord with the Father, even before His incarnation ? That 
thou mayest receive the doctrine, not only by faith but by 
proof, from the Old Testament, go to the first book, Genesis ; 
God saith, Let Us make man, not " in My image," but, in Gen. i, 
Our image. And after Adam was made, the sacred writer 



says, And the Lord created man; in the image of 
created He him. For he does not confine the prerogative of 
Godhead to the Father alone, but includes the Son ; to shew 
that man is not the work of God only, but also of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who is Himself also Very God. He, the Lord, 
who works when the Father works, wrought with Him in the 
case of Sodom also, according to the text, And the Lord Gen. 19, 
rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fir e^ 
from the Lord out of heaven. He, the Lord, afterwards 
appeared to Moses, as far as that was possible ; for the Lord 
is merciful, ever accommodating Himself to our infirmities. 

7. Pmt, in order to be sure that this is He who appeared 
unto Moses, hear Paul s testimony, who says, They drank 1 Cor. 
of that spiritual rock which followed them, and that rock was 
Christ*. And again: By faith Moses forsook Egypt. And Heb. 11, 
shortly after he says, Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater^ 
riches than the treasures in Egypt. This Moses says to Him, 26. 
Sheir me Thyself. You see that the Prophets too saw the Exod. 

33, 18, 

Sept. 
Omnipotent, &c. before creation. To doret (Qusest. in Josh. 4.) and S. Atha- 

avoid the difficulty, Origen is said to nasius (de Incarn. Christ. 17.)? agree 

have held that God created all things with Cyril in understanding this text to 

from eternity, vid. Bull, Def. F. p. ii. mean, that Christ, as God, S. Basil (de 

13. . 9. and Origen de Princip. i. 2. Sp. Sanct. 14.), and Tertullian (de Bap- 

. 10. On the other hand, Tertullian tism.9. in Marcion. iii. 5.) that Christ 05 

contr. Hermog. 3, considering the attri- alren /t/ incarnate in His mercies vouch- 

butes in question to belong, not to the safed to faith, watched over the Israel- 

Divine Nature, hut Office, denies that ites in all their wanderings, and was typi- 

God was Almighty from eternity ; while cally a Rock, i. e. as heing like the rock 

the Greeks affirmed this, vid. Cyril Alex, in the desert. Tertullian (de Patient. 5.), 

in Joan. xvii. S. p. IMi 5. Athan. Orat. ii. and S.Jerome (in loco) adopt the Jewish 

12 14, as understanding by the term the tradition, that the stream flowing from 

inherent hut latent attribute of doing the rock followed them all through their 

wh.-it He had not as yet d-me. to i^vrix- wanderings. Photius, ap. OZcumen. (vid. 

frixo*, vid. .Method, yri^t rut yitivcrui, Justinian, in loc.) understands li fol- 

ap. Phot Cod. 235. p. 933, 940. lowed" to mean "indulged," "gratified," 

c Almost all the early heretics, except u provided for," them ; as if, when they 

the Arians and Manichees, denied our drank of the rock. - drank of His 

Lord s personal existence before His virtue who condescended to consult and 

incarnation. answer to their wants. 

d S. C hrysostom (in loc.), Theo- 



\0 2 Christ is spoken &lt;&gt;/ an Ifn Lord in the Old Testament. 

LBCT. Christ, that is, as far as each was able. Shew me Thyself, 
that I may see Thee with undersbrndiny. And lie answers, 



T 1 

33, 13. There shall no man see My face and live. Wherefore, since 
, Sept *no man living could see the face of the Godhead, He took 

K-^SffV- 

on Him the face of human nature, that we though seeing it, 
might live. Yet when He wished to shew even that with a 

Mat. 17, little majesty, when His face (fid shine as the sun, the dis 
ciples fell to the ground affrighted: if then His bodily 
countenance, shining, not in the fulness of Him who wrought 
but in the measure of those who followed Him, yet terrified 
them, and was too much for them, how could any man gaze 
on the majesty of the Godhead ? Thou desirest a great thing, 
O Moses, saith the Lord ; and I allow thine unappeasable 

Exod. desire ; And I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken, 
but according as thou art able ; Behold, I will put thec in a 

ver. 22. cleft of the ruck\ tor being little, thou shalt lodge in a little 
space. 

8. Now here keep a watch on what I shall say, on 
account of the Jews. For my object is to shew that the 
Lord Jesus Christ was with the Father. The Lord then 

Exod. says to Moses, / will pass before thee with My glory, and 

O" I Q 

Sept. lf *M proclaim, the Name of the Lord before thee. Being Him 
self the Lord, what Lord doth He proclaim ? Thus thou 
seest, how He hath covertly taught the godly doctrine of the 
Father and the Son. And again in what follows, it is written 
Exod. in the very letter, And the Lord descended in the cloud, and 
? 4 t ?- stood by him there, and proclaimed the name of the Lord; 

&c.Sept. y 

and the Lord passed before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, 

the Lord merciful and grtn-ious, long-suffering, abundant in 
mercy and true ; keeping righteousness and shewing mercy 
unto thousands, taking away iniquities, and transgressions, 
and sins. And then in what follows, Moses, having bowed 
his head, and worshipped before the Lord who proclaimed 

ver. 8.9. the Father, say s, Do Thou, O Lord, go ivith us. 
(5.) 9. This is the first proof; now receive a second plain one. 

Ps. no, The Lord said unto My Lord, Sit Thou on My right hand. 
The Lord says this to the Lord ; not to a servant, but to the 
Lord of all, and His own Son, to whom He hath put all 

i Cor. 15, things in subjection. For when He saith, All things are put 
under Him, it is manifest that He is excepted which did put 



Christ is Lord of Angels. 103 

nil things under Hint : and afterwards, that God may be all 
in all. The Only-begotten Son is Lord of all things, and yet 



the obedient Son of the Father, who instead of seizing on the" V *- 
Lordship , by nature received it of the Father s own 



ay- 



for neither did the Son grasp at it, nor the Father reluctantly T f *? 

" oirouXat- 

communicate it. He it is who says, All things are delivered p&gt;^ Q Ufft . 
vnto Me of My Father ; " delivered unto Me, yet not as though *^| A , 
I had them not before f ; and I keep them well, not with- 27. 
drawing them from the Giver." 

10. The Son of God then is the Lord, the Lord, who was 
bom in Bethlehem of Judaea, according to the Angel who 
spoke to the shepherds, I bring you good tidings of great joy ; Luke 2, 
for unto you is born this clay, in the city of David, a Saviour, 
which is Christ the Lord. Of whom in another place an 
Apostle says, The word which God sent unto the children o/" A ^ ts 10 
Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ; He is Lord of all. 
15 ut when he says, of all, except nothing from His Lordship ; 
w lift her they be Angels, or Archangels, or principalities, or 
powers, or any created thing named by the Apostles, all 
things are under the Lordship of the Son. He is Lord of 
Angels, according to what thou hast in the Gospels. Then Mat. 4, 
th&lt;&gt; dcri 1 1 Imparted from Him, and Angels came and ministered 
unto Him; for Scripture says not, that they succoured Him, 
but that they ministered to Him, which is the part of 

rvants. When He was about to be born of a Virgin, 
Gabriel did Him service, having it committed to him as 
his peculiar privilege. When He was about to go into Egypt, 
that lie might overthrow the gods of Egypt made with 
hands*, again an Angel appeareth to Joseph in a dream. Mat. 2, 
After lie had been crucified, and had risen again, the Angel 
brought the good tidings, and as a trusty servant, said to the 
\\onn-n, (in, it ll His disciples that He is risen, and goeth Mat - 28 
before you into Galilee; behold, I have told you. As if he 

e Ov% a.^rira.t TO xuptvtiv, thought it 8 Vid. Isai. 19, 1. " Behold the Lord 

not rl&gt;l ri;. ctgvot&gt;yp.ov t IMiil. 2, G. rideth upon a swift cloud and shall come 

Tin- Arians argued that comniunira- into Egypt, and the idols of Egypt shall 

tii, n of power implied a time when it was be moved at His presence," &c. which 

not communicated, whereas the Catholic is considered to be fulfilled, when our 

doetrinr is, that the word describes a Lord was taken there in His infancy, 

.-/./ ,- which was without beginning, vid. by Eusebius also, Dem. vii. 20. Athan. 

A than. Orat. i. 14. 26. 27. and Petav. Incarn. V. 36, &c. 
Trin. v. 9. 



104 The ^ame of Jesus. 

LECT. had said, u I have not disobeyed my command, I protest that I 
x - have told you ; that if ye neglect, the blame may not rest 
- upon me, but upon the persons neglecting." This then is the 
One Lord Jesus Christ, of whom now the text speaks also, 

L 

i Cor. For though there he that are called Gods&gt; whether in 

8 5 - 6 - heaven or in earth, Yet to us there u One God the Father, of 

whom are all things, and we in Him; and One Lord Jesus 

( ////*/. by whom are ft// things, and. we by Him. 

IQ\ 11. And He has two names, Jesus Christ; Jesus, because 

He saves, Christ, because of His priesthood. And knowing 

this, the inspired Prophet Moses conferred these two titles on 

Numb, two most special men : changing the name of his own sue-. 

J. * 1 cessor in the government, Auses, to Jesus; and surnaming 

o Jiea. his own brother Aaron, Christ, that by two special men, he 

^.v 4 n) ight represent at once the High-priesthood and the kingdom 

. Sept. of Him who was to come, the One Jesus Christ. For Christ 

fj" is a High-priest like Aaron: since Christ glorified not Him- 

Heb. 5, se if fo oe m ade an High-priest ; but He that said unto Him, 

Thou art My Son, this day hace I begotten Thee. And Jesus 

the son of Nave was a type of Him in many things. When he 

Josh. 3, began his government of the people, he began at Jordan ; 

whence Christ also, after baptism, began His Gospel. The 

Josh.14, son of Nave appoints the Twelve, who were to divide the 

inheritance ; and Jesus sends forth the Twelve Apostles, the 

heralds of truth, into all the world. The typical Jesus saved 

Mat.2l,Rahab the harlot, who believed; and the true says, Behold, 

the publican* (Did the harlots go into the kingdom of heaven 

before you. With only a shout the walls of Jericho fell down 

Mat. 24, before the type ; and because of Jesus word, There shall not be 

left here one stone upon another, the Jewish temple opposite 

us is in ruins ; not indeed on the ground of the denunciation, 

but of the sin of the transgressors. 

12. There is One Lord Jesus Christ, that wondrous Name, 

Isa. 62, glanced at beforehand by the Prophets. For Esaias the 

11. Sept. Prophet says, Behold the Saviour is come nigh thee, having 

His reward; i Jesus among the Hebrews signifying Saviour. 

For the Prophetic gift, foreseeing the traitorous and bloody 

spirit of the Jews, veiled His name, lest from knowing it for 

certain, they might plot against Him leisurely. Moreover, 

He was called Jesus, not of men, but distinctly by the Angel, 



m/ 



The Xame (if Christ. 105 

ll( ,t coniin- on his own authority, but as sent by the power of 
God; who said to Joseph, Fear not to take unto thee Mary Mat. i, 
///// tcife ; for that irhich is conceived in her is of the Holy 
Ghost. . In tl she shall briny forth a Son, and thoii shalt call 
7//.v mime Jesus : and he straightway adds the reason of this 
name /&lt;&gt;r He shall saw His people from their sins. Con- 

. i 

sider how could He have a people, who was not yet born, 
unless He was in being, before He was bom. And this the vidLNi- 
Prophet says in His person, From the bowels of My Mother Cre ed. 
hath Iff tmide mention of My Name, because the Angel fore- ^ 8&gt; 
told that He should be called Jesus. And again, concerning Is49 L 
the conspiracy of Herod, He says, In the shadoiv of His hand*- 
hath He hid Me. 

13. Jesus then means among the Hebrews, " a Saviour fiifyMs. 
but in the Greek tongue, " a Healer: 1 seeing that He is 
Physician of souls and bodies, and curer of spirits; curing px, 
the blind in body, and leading minds into light ; healing the"- *~ 
lame in limb, and guiding the steps of sinners to repentance ; *x 
saying to the sick of the palsy, Sin no more, and, Take up thy ^ 
led and tralfc ; for since for the soul s sin the body was-| h 5 &gt; 
palsied, He first gave a cure to the soul, that He might 
extend it to the body. If any therefore is suffering in soul 
from sins, he has a Physician ; and if there be any here of 
little faith, let him say to Him, Help Thou mine unbelief. Mark 9, 
And if any be encompassed with bodily ailments, let him not 
mistrust, but let him approach; (for such also does He cure,) 
and let him know that Jesus is the Christ. 

1 1. For that He is Jesus, the Jews allow, but not that He 
is Christ ; wherefore the Apostle says, Who is a liar, but he \ j hu 

thai dcnieth that Jesus is the Christ/ But Christ is an 2 - 22 - 

(7.) 
High-priest, having an unchangeable priesthood: neither 



having begun His High-priesthood at any date 11 , nor deliver- 24 - 
ing it to a successor; as thou heardest me say when on 
Lord s day \ve discoursed in church on the words, After 
order of Melchisedek. He has not received His High-priest- rid. 

Ex 30 
hood from a carnal line, nor was He anointed with oil duly 22.25. 

compounded, but by the Father before the worlds; and being 

*&gt; Thi-&lt; is a peculiar opinion of Cyril*! our Lord, by the Arians.Epiph.Hser. 69. 

amon:: Catholics, tr had been hold by . 37. Eusebius also holds it. Demonstr. 

Philo, (vid. de Somn. p. 597. ed. Franc, v. 3. Nestorius accused the Catholics of 

1691.J and, with a view of dishonouring holding it. Cyril contr. Nestor, iii. p. 64. 



Christians so called from Christ. 

LECT. so much more excellent than the others, in that He is a 
Heb ? Priest with an oath. For they are priests without an oath ; 

21, nis but He with an oath bit Him that said. The Lord sware. 

* /i 
unuHim**^ n ^ not re P et ^- It was indeed an assurance enough, 

added in that the Father should but will it : but now it is twofold, 

I Pf* t rt fr 

Heb 6 *^ or w *th the will the oath follows; That by two immutable 
18. things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might 

have strong consolation, for our faith, who receive Jesus 

Christ the Son of God. 

15. He, the Christ, when He came, was denied by the 

Jews, and confessed by devils ; yet he was not unknown to 

Ps. 132, our forefather David, who says, / have ordained a lamp for 

my Christ, which lamp some have interpreted to be the 

1, 19. brightness of Prophecy, others the flesh which He took of 

2 Cor. the Virgin, according to the Apostle s words, We have this 

treasure in earthen vessels. Of Him the Prophet was not 

Amos 4, ignorant, when he said, And who declareth unto men His 

ept * Christ. Moses also knew Him, and Esaias knew Him, and 

Jeremias knew Him ; there was none of the Prophets who 
Luke 4, knew Him not. Him even the devils recognized ; for He 

rebuked them, and the sacred writer proceeds, because they 

knew that He was Christ. The Chief-priests knew Him not, 
John 4, arid the devils confessed Him ; the Chief-priests knew Him 

not, and a woman of Samaria proclaimed Him, saying, Come, 

see a man which told me all tilings tin it ever 1 did ; is not 

Mi* the Christ? 
Heb. 9, \Q This is Jesus Christ, who is come, an High-priest of 

* * * 

good things to come ; who out of the munificence of His 

Godhead has imparted to us His own title. For kings among 

men have a royal style, which they keep to themselves ; but 

Jesus Christ being the Son of God, has counted us worthy to 

(8.) be called " Christians." But some one will say, The name 

of " Christian" is new, and before this not in use ; and new 

things are often objected to, on the score of novelty. The 

Is. 65, prophet has anticipated the objection, when he says, But 

15. 16. t/ fem wJiidi serve Me, He shall call by a new name, which 

shall be blessed wpon the earth. Let us enquire of the Jews: 

Do ye serve the Lord, or no? Shew then your new name; for 

vour name was " Jews" and " Israelites" in the time of 



Moses and the other prophets, and after the return from 



&gt;/. land s ronccfsion. 107 



Habxlon. and up to the present time; where then is your 
new name ? But we, since we serve the Lord, have, as might 
be expected, the new name ; new indeed, but that new name 
which shall be blessed upon the earth. This name has got 
hold of the world; for Jews cover only a certain spot, but 
Christians reach the bounds of the world; for we preach the 
Name of the Only-begotten Son of God. 

17. But perhaps thou wouldest know whether the Apostles 
received and proclaimed the Name of Christ, or rather 
had Christ in themselves? Paul says to his hearers, Seek** Cor. 
ye a proof of Christ speaking in me ? Paul preaches Christ, 
saying, For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the 2 Cor. 4, 

O 

Lord, awl ourselves your servants for Jews sake. Now 
who is this ? It is the former persecutor. O mighty wonder ! 
lie who first persecuted, himself preaches Christ. But 
where tore ? was he bribed ? There was no one to bribe him 
this wa v. 1 1 ad he a sight of Him when on earth, and was awe- 

if 

struck thereby ? He had already been taken up into Heaven. 
1 1 e came out to persecute ; and after three days the persecutor 
is a preacher in Damascus. By what power ? Others call 
friends to be witnesses for friends ; but the witness I present 
to thee is this former enemy; and waverest thou yet? The 
testimony of Peter and John, though weighty, was open to 
suspicion, because they were His friends ; but when His 
former foe afterwards dies for Christ s sake, what room is 
there for doubting the truth ? 

18. Here I am led to express a suitable admiration of 
this appointment of the Holy Spirit; how He has confined 
the Kpistles of the rest to a small number, but to Paul, the 
former persecutor, has granted fourteen. It was not because 
IVter or John were less than Paul, that He restrained the 
gift; ((iod forbid!) but in order that His doctrine might be 
bevond ([uestion, lie granted to the former persecutor and 
mcmy to write more, that thus we might all be made be- 

lie\&lt; re. But ff/i vow amazed about Paul, and said, Is not Acts 9, 
this lie who used to persecute? Did he not come hitherto 21 * 
lead us bound unto Jerusalem? Wonder not, says Paul, I 
know that it is hard for me tn kirk against the pricks ; I 
know that / "in not nippt in he willed &lt;*n Apostle, because I\ Cor. 
fed the Chitrrh ,,f a m l ; but I di&lt;l it ignorantly ; farJifcU, 

13. 



108 Witnesses of Christ. 

LECT. I thought that the preaching of Christ was the destruction of 
- * the Law ; I knew not that He came to fulfil the Law, and 



*" 



1 Tim. not to destroy it ; but the grace of God was exceeding 
abundant in me. 

(9.) 19. Many, my beloved, are the true testimonies concerning 
Christ. The Father from Heaven is Witness of the Son ; the 
I Toly Ghost is Witness, descending bodily in the shape of a 
dove; the Archangel ^Gabriel is His witness, bringing good 
tidings to many ; the Virgin Mother of God is His witness ; 
the blessed manger is His witness. Egypt is His witness, 
who received her Lord while yet young in the flesh. Symeon 

Luke 2, is His witness, who received Him in his arms, and said, Lord, 

29. 30. now fe(t es t Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to 
Thy word, for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou 
hast prepared before the face of all people. And Anna the 

iy*(*- prophetess is His witness, that widow of most devout and 
austere life. His witness is John the Baptist, the greatest 
among the prophets, the introducer of the new covenant, who 
in a manner joined in himself the two Covenants, the Old and 
the New. Jordan is His witness among rivers : the sea of 
Tiberias is Mis witness among seas. The blind, the maim, 
the dead raised to life, are His witnesses. The devils are His 

Mark i, witnesses, saying, What have we to do with Thee, Jesus ; we 

f) A 

know Thee who Thou art, the Holy One of God. The winds 

are His witnesses, bidden and bridled by Him : the five 

loaves are His witnesses, multiplied to five thousand. The 

Vid. holy wood of the cross is His witness, which is seen among 



sup. iv. us ^ o jj^g (j a y anJ by means of those who have in faith taken 

10. Ji J 

thereof, has from this place now almost filled the whole 
world. The palm-tree in the valley is His witness, which 
supplied branches to the children who then hailed Him. 
Gethsemane is His witness, which to our imaginations almost 
shews Judas still. Golgotha, this holy place which is raised 
above all others, is His witness in the sight of all. The holy 
Sepulchre is His witness, and the stone which lies there to 
this day. The sun now shining is His witness, which then 
at the season of His salutary Passion suffered eclipse. The 
darkness is His witness, which was then from the sixth to 
the ninth hour : the light is His witness, which shone out 
from the ninth hour till evening. The Mount of Olives is 



Witnesses of Christ. 1 09 

His witness, whence He ascended to the Father; the clouds, 
laden with showers, are His witnesses, which received their 
Lord. The Heavenly gates which received their Lord are 
His witnesses; concerning which the Psalmist said, Lift up Ps.24,7. 
your ht ads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye ev erlasting ve rs. 



doors ; and the King of glory shall come in. His former foes 
bear witness to Him, of whom the blessed Paul is one, for a 
little while hating Him, for a long while serving Him. The 
Twelve Apostles witness of Him; not in words only, but by 
their own tortures and deaths, heralding the truth. The 
shadow of Peter is His witness, which in the Name of Christ 
healed the sick. The handkerchiefs and aprons are His 
witnesses, which once by Christ s power wrought like 
cures by means of Paul. Persians and Goths, and all they 
of the Gentiles, are His witnesses, dying for His sake, whom 
with the eyes of their flesh they never beheld. The devils, 
whom believers to this day drive away, bear witness to 
Him. 

20. So many and diverse, yea and more than these, are 
the witnesses of Christ: will any one then, henceforth, dis 
believe in Him, thus witnessed ? If, therefore, there be any 
who before believed not, let him believe now; if any was 
before a believer, let him take to him a greater increase of 
faitli, believing on our Lord Jesus Christ, and understanding 
whose name he bears. Thou art called Christian ; be tender 
of that Name ; let not our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, 
be blasphemed through thee, but rather let thy fair deeds 
shine before men ; that they who see them may, in our Lord 
Jesus Christ, glorify the Father who is in heaven : To whom 
be glory, both now, and for ever and ever. Amen. 



LECTURE XI. 

ON THE SON OF GOD*, AS ONLY-BEGOTTEN, BEFORE ALL AGES, 
AND THE CREATOR OF ALL THINGS. 



HEBREWS i. 1,2. 

God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in 
times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, hath in these 
last days spoken -nntn us by His Son. 

LECT. l. THAT we hope in Jesus Christ, we have shewn suffi- 

- ciently, according to our ability, in what we delivered to you 

yesterday. But we must not simply believe in Jesus Christ, 

nor receive Him, as if one of the many, improperly called 

xtiffrS,, Christs. For they were figurative Christs, but He is the 

e( ] true Christ, not raised by advancement from among men to 

u - the Priesthood, but having this dignity eternally from the 

*"* * ld- Father. And for this cause the Faith guarding us before- 

14. hand, lest we should suppose Him to be one of the ordinary 

Christs, adds to the profession of the Faith, that we believe 

" in One Lord Jesus Christ, the Only-begotten Son of 

God." 

2. And again, when thou nearest of the Son, think Him not 
an adopted Son, but a Son naturally, a Son Only-begotten, 
having no other for His brother ; for therefore is He called 
Only -begotten, because in the dignity of the Godhead, and in 
His generation of the Father, He has no brother. But we call 
Him the Son of God, not of ourselves, but because the Father 
Himself named Christ His Son ; and that name is true which 
is given to children by their fathers. 

3. Our Lord Jesus Christ then became man ; but by the 
many He was not known. Wishing, therefore, to teach that 
which was not known, He assembled His disciples, and asked 



( ////.s7 ifi tin- one trn&lt;\ ctt ni il Sun ft/ God. 1 1 1 

tin-in, H hofH say men, that /, the Sou of Man, am? Not Mat. 16, 
n -in vain-glow, but wishing to shew them the truth, lest 
dwelling with God, the Only-begotten of God, they should 
think lightly of Him as if He were a mere man. And when 
they answered, that some said He was Klias, and some 
Jeremias, He said to them, " They who know not are excus 
able, but ye, the Apostles, who have in My name cleansed 
lepers, and cast out devils, and raised the dead, ought not to 
be ignorant of Him, for whom ye do these wondrous works." 
And when all were silent, (for it was beyond man s reach to 
learn,) Peter, the leader of the Apostles, and chief herald of {- 
the Church, uttering no refinement of his own, nor persuaded 
hv man s reasoning, but having his mind enlightened from th 
Father, says to Him; Thou art the Christ; nor only so, but Lecture 
thf Son of the It ring God. And a blessing follows the speech, " * 
(for in truth it was above man,) and what he had said received 
this seal, that the Father had revealed it to him. For the 
Saviour savs, Jttcssvd art thon, Simon Bar jonah, for Jtesh 
find blood halh not revealed if unto thcc, but My Father nJticJt 
/v in heart tt. He therefore who acknowledges our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Son of God, partakes of this blessedness; but he 
who denies the Son of God, is a poor miserable man. 

4. Again, 1 say, when thou hearest of the Son, hear of Him 
as a Son, not merely in an improper sense, but in a true sense, 

i Son by nature, unoriginate a ; not as having come from &gt; 
bondage into the higher state of adoption, but as a Son ii t 
t rnally begotten, by an inscrutable and incomprehensible 
generation. And in like manner, when thou hearest of the 
First-bom, think not that this is according to men ; for the first- 
born among men have other brothers also. And it is some-* 
whore written, Israel /.v My Son, cren My Jirst-born; but Exod - 4 &gt; 
I Marl i.s. as Reuben was, the rejected first-born; for Reuben " 

* On the application of the word vaj- unoriginate." Athanasius also denies 

, anorigmato, m the Son and Spirit the Three unoriginate. Alexander of 

ther :v:it variety of opinion in the Alexandria taking a middle course 

primitive Church, (. lenient. Alex, calls ascribes to Christ an unoriginate genera- 

our Lord ^i *{ the unoriginate tinn. The two Gregories explain that the 

origin; hut, whereas the Mareionites difference of usage among Catholics 

:mi] M nnichees expressed their tritheism arose only from the difference of opinion 

under the word, and the Sahellians how best to avoid seeming in words to 

imputed that doctrine to the Church, countenance heresies which they one and 

the Apostolic Canons condemn those all abhorred, vid. Petav. de Trin. v.5. 
who baptize " in the name of the Three 



112 The &wt in a spiritual sense, uunriyinate, incomprehensible. 

LECT. went up to his father s couch, and Israel cast the Son of his 
Father out of the vineyard, and crucified Him. To others 



Deut. also the Scripture says, Ye are the children of the Lord your 
Ps 82 6 God; and elsewhere, / have said, Ye are gods; and all of you 
are children of the Most Hi ah. I have said, not, " I have 
begotten." They, in that God said, received the sonship, 
which they had not; He was not begotten to be other than 
He was before, but was begotten from the beginning, the Son 
of the Father, being above all beginning and all ages ; the 
IjvSw Son of the Father, in all tilings like to Him who begat Him, 
eternal of an eternal Father, Life of Life begotten, and Light 
of Light, and Truth of Truth, and Wisdom of Wisdom, and 
a King of a King, and God of God, and Power of Power. 

5. If then thou hear the Gospel saying, The book of the 

generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of Abra 

ham, understand it to mean " according to the flesh ;" for He 

Heb. 9, is the Son of David in the end of the world* but the Son of 

26 

God before all worlds unoriginate. The one He received, not 
having it before ; the other, which He hath, He hath eter 
nally, in that He is begotten of the Father. He has two 
fathers: one, David, according to the flesh; one, God the 

tu*s. Father, after a divine manner according to His Godhead. As 
the Son of David, He is both subject to time, and is handled, 
and His descent is traced; but according to His Godhead, 
He is subject neither to time nor place, nor has He descent; 

Is. 53, 8. for who shall declare His veneration? God is a Spirit; He 

John 4, W ] 1O i s gpjrit; hath spiritually begotten, as being immaterial, 
an inscrutable and incomprehensible generation. The Son 

Ps. 2, 7. Himself says of the Father, The Lord said unto Me, Thou art 
My Son, to-day have I begotten Thee. This to-day is not recent, 

Ps. 109, but eternal; a to-day without time, before all ages. From the 



(110),3. wom j)^ before the morning star, I begat Thee. 

6. Believe then on Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God; 

and that Son, Only-begotten; according to the Gospel, which 
John 3, says, For Cod so loved the world, that He gave His Only-begotten 

Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, bid 
18. have everlasting life. And again, He that believeth on Him 
John 5, is not condemned, but is passed from death unto life. But 

he that believeth not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath 
John 3, 
36. of God abideth on him ; because he hath not belie red on the 



n tf the Father u^ntrtfrnm time. \ ! &gt; 

Only-ucgulten Sun of God. Concerning whom John testify- John 3, 
ing says, And we beheld His glory, the glory as of the Only- ^ l 
begut It ii nf the Father; He is full of grace and truth; at 14. 
wliom the devils trembled, and said, Let us alone ; what have L^* 4 

* j 4 

\rt&gt; to do with Thee, Jesm, Thou Son of the Most High Mark 5&gt; 
God? 7 - 

7. He is then the Son of God by nature, and not by adop- ol&gt; fan. 
tion, begotten of the Father. And he that loveth Him that l John 
begat, loveth Him also that is begotten of Him ; but he who 
despises Him who is begotten, proceeds to insult Him who 
begat. But when thou hear of God s begetting, fall not (3.) 
upon bodily things : think not of a corruptible generation, 
lest thou be profane. God is a Spirit ; spiritual is His gene- John 4, 
ration : for bodies beget bodies, and need that time should 4&gt; 
intervene ; but time intervenes not in the generation of the 
Son from the Father. And in the one case what is begotten, 
is begotten imperfect ; but the Son of God was begotten Vid. 
perfect ; for what He is now, that is He from the beginning, 
being begotten without beginning. And we are begotten, so a. 
as to pass from infantine ignorance to a state of reason ; thy 
generation, O man, is imperfect, for thy increase is progressive, i* 
But think not that it is thus with Him, nor impute defect ii 
power to Him who begat: for if that which He begat was 
imperfect, and in time received perfection, thou imputest 
defect in power to Him who begat ; since that which time 
afterwards bestowed, this, according to thee, the Father from 
the beginning did not bestow. 

8. Think not, therefore, that this generation is human, as 
Abraham begat Isaac. For when Abraham begat Isaac, he 
begat, not whom he would, but whom another bestowed on 
him. But in God the Father s begetting, there is no igno 
rance nor intermediate deliberation. For to say that He 
knew not what was begotten is the greatest impiety : and it 
is as great to say that after deliberation held in time, He 
afterward became a Father. For God was not before with 
out a Son, and afterwards in time became a Father; but He 
hath the Son eternally, having begotten Him, not as men 
beget men, but as Himself only knoweth, who begat Him 
before all ages, Very God. 

9. For the Father being Very God, begat the Son like to 

i 



1 1 I Tht&gt; Mm is the hvso/ial Word &lt;&gt;f God. 

LECT. Himself, Very God. Not as teachers beget disciples, as 
Paul says to some, In Christ Jesus I have begotten you 



V 

through the Gospel. For in this case he who was not a son 



i Cor. 4, by nature, became a son by discipleship ; but in the case 

5 * before us, He is a son naturally, a son truly. Not as you, the 

illuminated, now become the sons of God; for ye also become 

John 1, sons, but it is by adoption of grace, as it is written, But as 

12. 13. man y as received Him, to them gave He power to become the 

sons of God, even to such as believe on His name : which 

were begotten, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of 

the will of man, but of God. And we indeed are begotten of 

water and of the Spirit ; but Christ was not thus begotten of 

the Father ; for at the time of His baptism addressing Him 

with the words, " This is My Son," He said not, " This is 

Mat. 3, now become My Son," but, " This is My Son :" that He 

17&gt; might make manifest, that even before the operation of bap 

tism, He was a Son. 

ytn z 10. The Father begat the Son, not as among men mind 
&gt;Zi xo- begets thought. For the mind in us is something subsisting; 
thought] but our thought, when uttered, is scattered abroad in the air 
orword. an j comes ^ o an e nd b . But we know Christ to be begotten, 

tVUTO- . 

not as a word sent forth, but a Word subsisting and living ; 
not spoken by the lips, and dispersed, but eternally and 
ineffably begotten of the Father and in a Person. For in the 
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and 
the Word was God, sitting at God s right-hand; the Word, 
understanding the Father s will, and creating all things at His 
will ; the Word, which came down and went up ; (for a word 
of utterance merely, when spoken, goes neither down nor up;) 
* es the Word speaking and saying, " I speak that which I have 
seen with My Father;" the Word, possessed of power, and 
reigning over all things; for the Father hath committed all 
things unto the Son. 

(4.) 11. The Father then begat Him, not as any of men can 
understand, but as Himself only knoweth. For how He begat 
Him, we profess not to tell ; only we insist upon its not being 
in this manner or that. Nor are we only ignorant of the 



h This was the doctrine held con- heresy ; the Samosatenes, Sabellians, 
cerning the Son by many schools of Photinians, &c. 



m 

xov. 
It vvo- 

ffTKfftl. 

John 1 



.\D one but the Holy Uhost //&lt; .///* tlw diet tic ij^neratiun. 1 K&gt; 

generation of the Son from the Father, but so is every created 
nature. Speak to tie earth, if it can tell thee; and though Job 12, 
thou inquire of all things that are upon the earth, they shall 
not be able to tell thee: for the earth cannot speak of the 
substance of Him who is its potter and fashioner. Nor is the Is. 64, 8. 
earth only ignorant, but the sun also ; for the sun was created 
on the fourth day, not knowing what had been in the three 
former days ; but he, since he knows not any thing of the 
three days which were before him, cannot tell forth the Creator 
Himself. The heaven shall not declare this ; for at the will &lt;V*- 
of the Father was the heaven like smoke established, by Christ. Is.5l, 6. 
Nor shall the heaven of heavens declare it, nor the waters that ept 
are above the heavens. Why then art thou cast down, O man, 
because ignorant of what not even the heavens know ? Nor 
are the heavens only ignorant of this generation, but also 
every angelic nature. For should a man ascend (were it pos 
sible) to the first heaven, and perceiving the ranks of Angels 
there, approach them and ask, how God begat His own Son ; 
they would perhaps say, " We have others beyond us, greater 
and higher than we ; ask them." Ascend to the second heaven 
and the third ; attain, if thou canst, to Thrones, and Dominions, 
and Principalities, and Powers ; and even though one should 
attain unto them, which is impossible, yet would they also 
decline to answer; for neither do they know it. 

12. For me, I have ever wondered at the curiosity of bold 
men, who through their seeming reverence fall into impiety. 
For knowing nothing of Thrones, and Dominions, and Prin 
cipalities, and Powers, the workmanship of Christ, they 
attempt to be inquisitive about the Creator Himself. Tell 
me first, O most daring man, how a Throne differs from a 
Dominion, and then busily inquire into the things of Christ. 
Tell me, what is a Principality and what a Power, and what 
a \irtne, and what an Angel; and then inquire concerning 
their Maker; for all things were made by Him. But thou 
wouldest not ask Thrones or Dominions, or rather thou canst 
not; what other is there that knoweth the deep things of God, l Cor. 2, 
save only the Holy Ghost, who spake the Divine Scriptures? 10 * 
But not even the Holy Ghost Himself has spoken in the 
Scriptures concerning the generation of the Son from the 
Father ; why then art thou curious about things which not 

I 2 



116 The ,SW in nil /v.v^r/.v like the Father. 



LECT. even the Holy Ghost has written in the Scriptures ? Thou, 
- who knowest not what is written, why art thou inquisitive 



about what is not written ? There are many subjects of 
inquiry in the Divine Scriptures ; we comprehend not what 
is written ; why do we busy ourselves about what is not 
written ? Enough is it for us to know, that God hath begotten 
One Only Son. 

13. Be not ashamed to confess thine ignorance, seeing that 
thou art ignorant with Angels. He who begat alone knows 
Him who was begotten ; and He who was begotten of Him, 
knows Him who begat. He who begat knows what He 
begat ; and the Holy Spirit of God testifies in the Scriptures, 

1 Cor. 2, that He who was begotten without beginning, is God. For 
what man kiwu eth the things of a man, save the spirit of 
))i&lt;ni, which is in him ! even so, the things of God knoweth no 

John 5, man, but the Stririt of God. For as the Father hath life in 

26 

Himself, so halh He given to the Son to have life in Himself; 

Ib.5,23. and that all men should honour the 8on, even as they honour 
the Father ; and as the Father quickeneth whom He will, 

Ib.b.ll.even so the Son quickeneth whom He trill. Neither He who 
begat suffered any loss, nor lacks there any thing to Him who 
was begotten . (I know that I have said these things many 
times, but they are said so often for your safety.) Neither 
has He who begat, a father, nor He who is begotten, a 
brother ; neither was He who begat changed into the Son, 
nor did He who was begotten become the Father d . Of One 
Only Father, is One Only-begotten Son ; neither two Unbe- 
gotten, nor two Only-begotten; but there is One Father, 
Unbegotten ; (for He is unbegotten who has no father;) and 
One Son, eternally begotten of the Father; begotten not in 

&lt;rg0 ttl*&gt;- time, but before the worlds ; not increased by advancement, 
but having been begotten that which He is now. 

?;. 14. We believe then in the Only-begotten Son of God, 
(5.) begotten of the Father, Very God. For the True God, be 
gets not a false God, as has been already said. Nor did He 
first resolve, and afterwards beget Him ; but He begat Him 
eternally, and far more quickly than our words or thoughts; 

c The Arians charged this upon the d This tenet was one of the forms of 
Catholics as legitimately following from Sabellianism ; vid. Basil. Ep. 129.1. 
their doctrine. Athan. Orat. iv. 9. Apost. Can. xli. 



117 

I m \\c speaking in time, take up time; but in the case of the 
Divine I mvcr, the generation is apart from time. And, as I 
have said many times, He did riot bring the Son from nothing 
into being", nor take him who was not into sonship ; but the 
I ather, being Eternal, eternally and ineffably begat One Only i 
Son, who has no brother. Nor are there two first principles ; . 
but the Father is the head of the Son ; One is the beginning, cipie. 
l-W the Father begat His Son, Very God, called Emmanuel; n f 3. 



and Emmanuel, being interpreted is, God with us. at l &gt; 

15. And wouldest thou know that He who was begotten 
of the Father, and afterwards made man, is God ? listen to 
the Prophet s words, This is our God, and there shall none Bar. 3, 

q t _ O"7 

other be accounted of in comparison of Him. He hath found c 
out all the iciiy of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob 
///\ scrranf, and to Israel His beloved. Afterwards He did 
sht tc Himself upon earth., and conversed with men. Seest 
thou God taking man s nature after the giving of Moses law ? 
1 1 car too a second testimony to Christ s Godhead, that which 
\vus just now read, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: Heb. i, 
for lest, from His presence here in the flesh, He should be , 
thought to have been advanced after this to the Godhead, the 



Scripture says plainly, Therefore God, even Thy God, 
anointed Thee itith the oil of gladness above Thy fellows. 
Seest thou Christ, as God, anointed by God the Father f ? 

16. Wouldest thou receive yet a third testimony to Christ s 
Godhead? Listen to Esaias, saying, Egypt hath laboured, Is. 45, 
tun? tJic KOVGM of Ethiopia ; and after a little, and in 

they make their prayer, because God /.v ///. TJiee, and 
/v no God save Thee; Thou art God, and we kneiv it 
not, God of Israel the Saviour; almost saying the very same 
thing which He said in the Gospel, The Father is in Me, John 14, 
and I (un in the Father. He said not, / am the Father, but, 1L 
the Father /.&lt;? /// Me, &lt;tnd I am in the Father. And again, 
1 1 1- said not, / and the Father am one, but, / and the Father 
arc one; that we should neither separate them, nor so con- t/w T - 
found them, as to make the Son the Father. One they are, *(" 
in respect of the attributes which belong to Godhead, since above, 

Cat. iv. 
8. 

Arius maintained. human nature, vid. Peter, de Incarn. 

f Several Fathers consider that our xi. 8. . 9. 
Lord is called Christ apart from Hi.* 



118 The Son not the Father nor a Creature. 

LECT. God hath begotten God. One, from consideration of their 
kingdom ; for the Father reigns not over these, and the Son 



r "* 



over those, (like Absalom, lifting himself up against his 
father;) but that kingdom which the Father has, the same 
has the Son likewise. One they are, because there is no 
disagreement or division between them ; for the will of the 
Father is not one, and that of the Son another. One, because 
the works of Christ are not one, and the Father s other; for 
the creation of all things is one, the Father having created 
Ps. H8, them through the Son : He spake, and they were made ; He 
vers. r commanded, and they icere created, saith the Psalmist; for 
He who speaks, speaks to One who hears ; and he who bids, 
- bids as One who is present with Him. 

17. The Son then is Very God, having the Father in 
Himself, not changed into the Father; for the Father was 
not made man, but the Son. For let the truth be freely 
spoken F . The Father suffered not for us; but the Father 
sent Him who should suffer for us. Neither let us ever say, 
There was a time, when the Son was not h ; nor let us admit 
that the Son is the Father. But let us walk in the king s 
highway ; let us turn aside neither to the right-hand nor to 
the left. Neither let us, thinking to honour the Son, call 
Him the Father ; nor, supposing to honour the Father, ima 
gine the Son to be some one of the creatures. But let the 
One Father through the One Son be worshipped, and let 
not their worship be separated; let the One Son be pro 
claimed, who before the ages sitteth at the right hand of the 
Father ; partaking in His throne eternally, not by advance 
ment in time, after His passion. 






John 14, is. ff e w j lo j ia fh seen the Son, hath seen the Father; for 
the Son is in all things like to Him who begat Him, Life of 
Life begotten, Light of Light, Power of Power, God of God. 
The characteristics of Godhead are not distinct in the Son ; 
he who is counted worthy to behold the Son s Godhead, 






attains to the fruition of the Father. This is not my word, 

John H, but that of the Only-begotten Son ; Have I been so long time 
y 

8 The Catholics were accused by the on this charge. Cyril seems from this 

Arians of Sabellianising. Eustathius passage not to have been free from a like 

and Marcellus were both deposed from prejudice against their companions. 

their sees, (the latter with reason,) by h % t % rt ^ % t&gt; one o f the Arian 

the Arian Councils, A. D. 330 340, formulae. 



The Son ant called a yon. (is the creatures are called sons. 

u-ith you, and hast Ikon not known Me, Philip X He that 
hatli seen Me, hath seen the Father. And to be brief, let us 
neither make a separation nor confusion between the Father 
and the Son; and neither say thou ever, that the Son is 
foreign to the Father, nor give way to them who say, that the 
Father is at one time the Father, at another, the Son; for 
these things are strange and impious, and not the doctrines 
of the Church. But the Father, having begotten the Son, 
remains the Father, and is not changed. He begat Wisdom, 
yet retained Wisdom Himself; and begat Power, yet became 
not weak ; He begat God, He lost not His Godhead ; and 
neither has He Himself lost aught, by diminution or change, 
nor has He who was begotten any thing wanting. Perfect is 
He who begat, perfect is That which was begotten ; He who 
begat, is God, He who was begotten, is God, Himself God 
of all things, yet styling the Father, His own God ; for He 
is not ashamed to say, / ascend unto My Father and your John 20, 
Father, and to My God and yonr God. Ibove* 

l!&gt;. But lest thou shouldest think that He is the Father of Cat. vii. 

7 
the Son and of the creatures in a like sense, He has in what 

follows signified a difference. For He said not, " I ascend to 
our Father," lest the creatures should be made fellows of the 
Only-begotten : but He said, " My Father, and your Father ;" 
in one way Mine, by nature, in another yours, by adoption. 
And again, " to My God, and your God ;" in one way Mine, as 
His True and Only-begotten Son ; in another yours, as being 
His workmanship. The Son of God then is Very God, 
iiH-H-ibly begotten before all ages; (for I say the same thing 
often to you, that it may be graved upon your mind.) Believe (7.) 
also that God has a Son; but how He has, inquire not; 
lor though thou seek, thou shalt not find. Exalt not thyself, 
lest thou fall; ////;//: only upon those- things ichich have beenEcdus. 

inntanded thee. Tell me first who He is who begat, and 3 22 
then learn what He begat; but if thou canst not understand 
His nature who begat, search not into the manner of That 
which was begotten. 

20. It is enough for godliness for thee to know, as we have 

1 u The Father is His God," says be God," ex eo natus in Deum est. De 
Hilary, as quoted by the Benedictine Trin. iv. 53. 
Editor, " because of Him He is born to 



120 The Son a Son before he was born at Bethlehem. 

LECT. said, that God hath One Only Son, One, naturally begotten ; 

who began not to be when He was born in Bethlehem, but is 

before all worlds. For listen to Micah the prophet, saying, 

5 2* And thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among 
the thousands ofJudah, yet out of thee shall He come forth 
unto Me, that is to be Ruler in Israel; whose goings forth 
have been of old, from everlasting. Think not then of Him 
who is now come out* of Bethlehem ; but worship Him who 
is eternally begotten of the Father. Allow not any who say, 
that the beginning of the Son is in time; but acknowledge the 
Father, as that Beginning apart from time ; for the Father is 
the Beginning of the Son, timeless, incomprehensible, without 
beginning ; the Father is the fountain of the river of righte 
ousness, even of the Only-begotten; who begat Him as Himself 
only knoweth. And wonkiest thou know, that our Lord Jesus 
Christ is likewise King Eternal? listen again to Him, when he 

John 8, says, Your father Abraham rejoiced to see My day, and he 
saw it, and was glad. Then, when the Jews received this 

.John 8, hardly, He says again to them something yet harder; before 
Abraham -was, I am. And again, He says to the Father, And 

John 17, now, O Father, glorify Thou Me with TJiine own self , with 

5&lt; the glory which I had with Thee before the world was; for 

He has plainly said, " before the world was, I had glory with 

ver. 24. Thee." And again, when He says,jfor Thou lovedst Me before 
the foundation of the world, He evidently declares, " I have 
eternal glory with Thee." 

(*.) 21. We believe then in One Lord Jesus Christ, the Only- 
begotten Son of God; begotten of His Father, Very God 

Col. i, before all worlds; by whom all things were made. Whether 
they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers, all 
things were made by Him, and there is none of things created, 
\vhich is exempted from His authority. Be every heresy 
silent, which brings in different creators and framers of the 
world ; be silent the tongue which blasphemes Christ the Son 
of God ; let them be silent, who say that the Sun is Christ, for 
He is the sun s Creator, not the sun which we see. Let them 
be silent, who say that the world is the workmanship of An 
gels 4 , who wish to wxest His dignity from the Only-begotten; 

k The Manic-bees said that the Surt the world was created by Angels, 
was Christ, and the Gnostics held that 



7 At- Father oritjinntcs as willing, the So7i has sway as creating. 121 

lor whether they be things visible, or invisible, whether 
thrones or dominions, or any thing that is named, all 
tilings were made by Christ. He reigns over the things 
which have been created by Himself, not having captured as 
His prey what belongs to another, but ruling over His own 
workmanship; as the Evangelist John has said, All things were John 1, 
made f&gt;y Him, and without Him was not any thing made, 3 
all things were made by Him, the Father working by the 
Son. 

2 2. Now I wish to give an illustration of what I have been 
saving. I know that it is but feeble ; for what of things 
visible, can be an exact emblem of Divine and Invisible 
Power ? yet, feeble as it is, be it spoken by the feeble to the 
feeble. For suppose a certain king, whose son was a king, 
wishing to form a city, should impart to his son, his partner 
in the kingdom, the form of the city ; and he receiving the 
pattern, should bring his design to an accomplishment: in 
like manner when the Father proposed to form all things, the 
Son at the will of the Father, created all things, that the act nufutn. 
f willing 1 might secure origination to the Father, and the 
Son in turn might be sovereign over His own workmanship, 
the Father not separated from lordship over His own works, 
and the Son reigning over things created not by others, 
but by Himself. For, as I have said, neither did Angels 
rrnite the world, but the Only-begotten Son, who was 
begotten, as I have said, before all ages ; by whom all things 
were made, nothing being excepted from His creation. And 
now L finished what I had to say thus far, by the grace of 
Christ 

J3. Let us now go back to our profession of the faith, and (9.) 
so finish for the present. Christ made all things, whether 
tliou speak of Angels or Archangels, Dominions or Thrones. 
Not that the Father availed not to create the works Himself ; 
hut He willed the Son to reign over His own workmanship, 
Himself giving to Him the design of the things to be made: 
for the Only-begotten honouring His own Father, says, 7%&lt;?john5, 

/ can &gt;l vnthiiifj nf Himself, hut u-hnt He sceth the Father 
&lt;!&lt;&gt; ; t nr ////&lt;// thinysfHH rf, //,&gt; ,Joeth, these also doet/i the Son 



1 pupa, resolve, i. e. the Almiphtyxmade to the Son, as a nod is the bodily 
Father s primary expression of His will repression of the will. 



122 The Son created all things at the Father s icilL 

LECT. likewise. And again, My Father worketh hitherto, and I 
Johns wor & &gt; there being no incongruity in the things wrought, 
17. for all Mine are Thine, and Thine are Mine, saith the Lord 
John 17, i n t] ie Gospels. And this may we most certainly know from 
Gen. 1, the Old and New Testaments. For when He said, Let Us 
26 make man in Our image, after Our likeness, it is manifest 
that He addressed some one present. But most decisive of 
Ps. 148, all are the Psalmist s words, He spake, and they were made ; 
Book}" ^ e cwwrncMided, and they were created; as if the Father 
MV/U. bade and spoke, and the Son created all things at His will. 
Job 9, 8. And this has Job mystically said: He which alone spreadeih 
out the heavens, and treadeth upon the waves of the sea; 
signifying to those who understand, that He who by His 
presence walks upon the sea, is also He who before this made 
Job 38, the heavens. And again the Lord says, Or hast thou taken 
&gt;eptl earth and clay, and fashioned a liriny creature, and set it 
with the power of speech upon the earth ? then afterwards, 
ver. 17. Have the gates of death opened to thee with fear; and have 
the porters of hell been scared when they saw thee ? thus 
signifying, that He who through His loving-kindness de 
scended into hell, at the first created also man out of clay. 

24. Christ then is the Only -begotten Son of God, and the 

John i, Maker of the world ; for He u-tts hi the world, and the world 

was made by Him, and He came unto His own, as the Gospel 

teaches us. Xot only of the things which appear, but also of 

nu/Mirt. the things which appear not, is Christ the Maker, at the will 

* J. Jl * 

Colos. 1, of the Father. For by Him, saith the Apostle, were all things 

1 (^ 1 T 

created, that are in heaven and that are in earth, visible and 
invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or princi 
palities, or powers ; all things were created by Him, and for 
Him; and He is before all things, and by Him all things 
consist. Though thou shouldest mention the worlds, yet is 
nvpoiri. Jesus Christ the Maker of these also, at the behqst of the 
Heb. 1, Father; for in these last days God hath spoken unto us by 
His Son, whom He hath appointed Heir of all things, by 
whom also He made the worlds: To whom be glory, and 
honour, and might, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, 
now and always, and world without end. Amen. 



LECTURE XII. 



ON THE INCARNATION OF THE SON OF GOD. 



ISAI. vii. 10 14. 

Moreover the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying, Ask thee a 
sign of the Lord thy God ; ask it either in the depth, or in 
the hfight above. And Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither 
ii-ill I tempt the Lord. And he said, Hear ye now, O 
House of David ; is it a small thing for you to weary men, 
I nit will ye weary my God also ? Therefore the Lord Him 
self x/m 1 1 gice you a sign ; Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, 
and ln&gt;&lt;n a Son, and shall call His Name Immanuel. 

1. NURSLINGS of purity, and disciples of soberness, let us 
with lips full of purity hymn the praises of God, born of a 
Virgin. Let us, who are accounted worthy to partake of the 
flush of the Spiritual Lamb, partake of the head with the feet; vid - 
of the head, which means His Godhead ; of the feet, that is, 12, 9. 
His manhood. Wo, who are hearers of the Holy Gospels, 

lut us attend to John the Divine; for he who has said, //aJohn 1, 

7 i 

(In- beginning was the Word, and the Word u-as with God, 
&lt;i nd the Wort I u-as God, has added, And the Word became***- 14. 
flesh. For neither is it religious to worship the mere man, 
nor is it pious to speak of Him as God only, separate from 
His manhood. For if Christ, as He truly is, be God, but 
took not manhood, we are aliens from salvation. Be He 
tin i) adored as God, but let it be believed that He became 
man ; for it boots not to call Him man, without His God 
head, nor is it salutary, if we confess not His manhood 
together with His Godhead. Let us confess the presence of 
the King, and the Physician. For the King Jesus, whenvid. 
about to be our Physician, having girded Himself with the 4 



124 Errors of heretics on the doctrine. 

LECT. napkin of human nature, ministered to what was sick ; the 
XII 

perfect Teacher of babes, He hath become a babe with 

babes, that He might make wise the foolish. The Bread 
of Heaven came down to the earth, that it might nourish the 
famishing. 

loJoiiuv 2. But the Jewish race, who have set at nought Him 
who has come, and. expect him who is to come wickedly*, 
have refused the True Christ, and the deceived wait for the 
deceiver. And even in this is the Saviour found to be true, 

John 5, Who said, lam come in My Father s name, and ye receive Me 
not ; if another shall come in his own name, him ye will 
receive. It is well also to ask the Jews a question. Is Esaias 
the Prophet, who says, that Emmanuel shall be born of a 
Virgin, true or false ? If they accuse him as false, it is 
nothing wonderful ; for it is their way not only to accuse the 
prophets as liars, but also to stone them. But if the Prophet 
is true, point out Emmanuel. Further, shall he, who is to come, 
who is looked for by you, be born of a virgin, or no ? For if 
he is not to be born of a virgin, ye charge falsehood on the 
Prophet ; but if ye expect this in the case of him who is to 
come, why do ye refuse Him who is come already ? 
(2.) 3. Let the Jews then, since they so will, go astray ; but 
let the Church of God be glorified. For we receive God the 
Word, who was truly made man, not of the will of man and 
woman, as the heretics say b , but made man of the Virgin and 
the Holy Ghost according to the Gospel, not in appearance , 
but in reality. And that He was really made man of the 
Virgin, now attend the time for teaching it, and thou shalt 
receive the proof; for heretics go wrong in many ways. 
Some of them altogether deny that He was born of the 
Virgin d ; others say that He was born, yet not of a virgin, 
but of a woman married to a husband. And others say that 
Christ was not God made man, but that a man was made 
God e ; for they have dared to say that it was not the pre 
existing Word who became man, but that a certain man by 
advancement was crowned. 



* i. e. Antichrist. ture, (iv. 9.) who said He was born, but 

b e. g. The Ebionites, Theodotus, c. not of the Virgin, as if 3/a 

c As the Docetae taught. c Paul of Samosata. 
A As these, mentioned in a former Lee- 






77/r.y must hi r&lt;&gt;fnl&lt; &lt;l .ffmn ,sVr//&gt;/tf/v&gt;. 1:25 

1. Hut remember thou the things spoken yesterday concern- 
ing His Godhead; believe that that very same Only-begotten 

i of God, was again bom of the Virgin. Listen to John 
tin- Kvangelist, who says, And the Word became fesh, awrfJohn i, 
dtn lf timotHj ?/-&lt;?. For the Word was eternal, begotten before 
all ages of the Father ; but the flesh He took lately, for our 
sukes. But many object, and say, " What reason was there 
so great, that God should descend to manhood ? and, Can the 
nature of God have converse with men at all? and, Is it 
|xsible for a virgin to bear? Since then there is much 
controversy, and the strife is various in its forms, come, let 
og, by Christ s grace, and the prayers of those present, explain 
each difficulty. 

5. And first we have to inquire, wherefore Jesus came (3.) 
down? Now heed not any ingenious views of mine; else 
thou mavest be misled; but unless thou receive the witness 

i 

of the prophets concerning each matter, believe not what is 
spoken ; unless thou learn from Holy Scripture concerning 
the Virgin, and the place, arid the time, and the manner, 
receive not witness from man. Any one at this time who 
teaches it, may possibly be suspected; but who of any sense, 
will suspect him who prophesied a thousand years and more 
ago ? If then thou inquire the reason of Christ s coming, go 
back to the first book of the Scriptures. In six days God 
made the world ; but the world was for man. The sun, 
however resplendent with bright beams, was made to give 
light t&lt;&gt; man. And all the living creatures were made to 
serve us. Herbs and trees were created for our enjoyment. 
All the works were good, but of these none was an image of 
(iod, save only man. The sun was fashioned at His mere 
command; man by God s hands. Let Us make man in Our Gen. 1, 
ou H itn&lt;i&lt;/&lt;\ aj tcr Our likeness. The wooden image of an 26 
earthly king is honoured; how much more, then, the rational 
imago of God. Yet this, the greatest of God s creation, 
disporting himself in Paradise, was by the devil s envy cast 
out. The foe exulted over the fall of him whom he had 
envied ; wouldest thou have had the foe continue to rejoice ? 
He, not daring to accost the man because of his strength, 
accosted, as being weaker, the woman, yet a virgin; for after 

his expulsion from Paradise, then Adam knew Eve his wife. Gen. 4, 

1. 



Christ cmne in the flesh to restore man. 

LECT. 6. Cain and Abel succeeded in the race of man ; and Cain 

was the first murderer. Afterwards the deluge was poured 

abroad, because of the great wickedness of men. Fire came 

down from heaven on the people of Sodom, because of their 

transgression. After a time God chose Israel ; but even he 

became froward, and the chosen race received a wound. : 

For while Moses stood before God upon the mount, a calf 

was worshipped by the people instead of God. Under their 

Lawgiver Moses, who said, Thou shalt not commit adultery, 

a man entered a resort of sinners, and dared to be wanton. 

After Moses, the Prophets were sent to heal Israel ; but, 

while they exercised that office, they bewailed themselves, 

as not getting the better of the evil ; so that one of them 

Micah says, alas, The good man is perished out of the earth, and 

Pa43 then* is none upright among men : and again, They are all 

quoted gone out of the way ; they are together become unprofitable ; 

there is none that doeth good, no, not one. And again, 

Hos.4,2. Cursing, and stealing, and adultery, and killing, are poured 

Sept * out on the land. They sacrificed their sons and their 

Yj i f\L&gt; ** ^ 

37] daughters unto devils. They used auguries, and enchant- 
Amos2, ments, and divinations; and again, They fastened their gar- 
Q pt * ments with cords, and made hangings near the altar* . 

(4.) 7. Very great was the wound of man s nature. From the 

is. i, 6. sole of the foot even unto the head there was no soundness in 

&gt;ept&lt; it; there icas no mollifying ointment, nor oil, nor bandages. 

Then the Prophets, bewailing themselves, and being in 

Ps.13, 7. trouble, said, Who shall give salvation unto Israel out of 

14 P U. Si on ? an d again, Let Thy hand be upon the man of Thy 

Pr. B. right hand, and upon the Son of man, whom Thou madcst 

V6rs. 

Ps 80 strong for Thyself ; so will we not go back from Thee. And 

17. 18. another of the Prophets cries out, Bow Thy heavens, 

4&gt; Lord, and come down ; the wounds of man s nature pass our 

1 Kings skill to heal ; they have slain Thy Prophets, and digged down 

19 10 - Thine altars ; the evil is irretrievable by us ; Thou must 

retrieve it. 

8. The Lord heard the prayer of the Prophets. The Father 
did not overlook our race which was perishing ; He sent His 

f The verse stands in our transla- on clothes laid to pledge by every 
tion thus: " They lay themselves down altar." 



7&gt; ./7.v i i&gt;iJtf. tti-tit f His coining. 1 27 

own Son, the Lord from heaven, to be our Physician. And 
&lt;&gt;m- of the Prophets says, Hie Lord whom ye seek cometh,Mal.3,i. 
and He shall fiHt/dctily come, whither? to His temple, where 
m-&lt;l Him. Then, having heard this, another of the 
Prophets says to him, "When telling of God s salvation, John 8, 
speakest thou low ? Bringing the good tidings of God s salva- 5 
tion, speakest thou in secret ?" thou that tellest good tidings to Is. 40, 
Zini^ijet (/tee up into the high mountain ; say unto the cities of ^ r ^ t 
Jm (ah what? Beholdyour God! Behold the Lord God will asthe 
come with strong hand. Again, the Lord Himself said, Lo, Zech 2&gt; 
/ finite, and I icill dwell in the midst of thee, saith the^-^- 
Lord. And many nations shall be joined to the Lord. The 
Israelites have refused salvation through Me; I come to gather Isa. 66, 
all the nations and the languages; for He came unto His 



, (ait! His own received Him not. Comest Thou, andn. 
what wilt Thou bestow on the nations ? I come to gather alt Is. 66, 
natinn* : &lt;nxl I will leave on them a Sign. For from My 
conflict on the Cross, I will give to each of My soldiers a 
royal Seal to bear upon his brow ! And another of the "Pe*- 
Prophets saith, He bowed the heavens also, and came down, catTiv. 
1 1 nd dark/less was under His feet. For His coming down p 4 1RO 
from heaven was not known by men. 

/ 

9. Then Solomon, hearing his father David saying these 
things, and having built a wondrous house, and looking 
forward to Him who should come into it, says in astonish 
ment, But will God in reru deed dwell ivith men on theZChron. 

6 1 R 

earth Yea, say^ David, anticipating Him in the Psalm, 
which ix inscribed, For Solomon; in which it is said, He shall 
(nine down like rain into a fleece of wool. " Like rain," hePs-72, 

savs, because of 1 1 is heavenly nature : " into a fleece of wool," J 

J , Ib. ver. 

because of His manhood. For the rain coming down into a6. Pr. B. 
fleece of wool, descends noiselessly ; so that, the mystery of 
His birth being unknown, the wise men said, Where is He 
who i.s hum King nf the Jews/ and Herod, being troubled, Mat. 2, 
inquired concerning Him who was born, and said, Where is 2 " 4 
Christ l&gt;/-/i 

10. Who is He who comes down? He says afterwards, 

Ib t lidi th with the ftun and he/ore the moon, for generations Ps. 71, 
of ()&lt;-;)&lt; ,-&lt;!tin,)s. And again another of the Prophets says, * 5&gt; 

greatly, O daughter of Zion ; shout, O daughter ofzech.9, 

9. 



1:2N ft/guy of Christ. 



LECT. Jerusalem ; behold, thy Kiny comet h unto thee ; He is just, 
- and having salvation. There are many kings ; of which of 
them speakest thou, O Prophet? Give us a sign which other 
kings have not. If thou say, He is a purple-clad king, the 
dignity of such apparel has been anticipated. If thou say 
that He is attended by spear-men, and seated on a gold- 
embossed chariot, this also has been anticipated by others. 
Give us a peculiar sign of that King, whose coming thou 

Zech.9, announcest. And the Prophet answers and says, Behold, 
thy King cometh ; He is just, and having salvation, lowly, 
and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt, the foal of an ass, \ 

pnvyt- not in chariots. Thou hast an incommunicable mark of 
the King who is to come. Alone of kings did Jesus sit 

any* upon an unharnessed foal, entering into Jerusalem, with 
acclamations like a kins;. And what does this Kinor, who 



_ is to come ? By the blood of Thy covenant, I have sent forth 
EcTben. Thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water. 
Zech. 9, 11. But He might chance to sit upon a foal; give us rather 
a sign, of the place where the king who is to enter in, shall 
stand ? And give not the sign far from the city, lest we be 
ignorant of it ; but give it us near, and manifest to our eyes, 
that, while in the city, we may behold the place. Again the 
Zech.l 4, Prophet answers, saying, And His feet shall stand in that 
4t day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on 
the east. Can any one stand within the city, and not behold 
the place ? 

12. We have two signs, and we desire a third; tell us what 

the Lord shall do when He is come. Another Prophet says, 

Is. 35, Behold your God, and so on ; then, He will come and 

save you ; then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the 

ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall the lame 

man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing. 

And let us mention another testimony also. Thou speakest, 

O Prophet, of the Lord coming, and doing signs such as never 

Is. 3 ,14. were; what other evident one givest thou besides? The Lord 

*e*;T*&lt; comes into judgment with the ancients of His people, and 

the princes thereof. A notable sign this; the Master judged 

&gt;ept * by Ancients, His servants, and enduring it. 

(5.) 13. These things the Jews, though they read, hear not; for 

they have stopped the ears of their heart, that they may not hear. 



Christ catHc in thfjksh that f/v miyht endure, the sit/lit of God. 

Hut U t us believe in Jesus Christ, who came in the flesh, and 
\\ as made man; for otherwise we had not received Him. 
!&lt;&gt;r since we could not look on Him, or enjoy Him, as He 
BB, He became what we are, that we might attain to the 
enjoyment of Him. For if we cannot look full on the sun, 
which was created on the fourth day, can we behold God, its 
Creator ? The Lord came down in fire on Mount Sinai, and 
the people endured it not, but said to Moses, Speak thou with Exod. 
Ml, ft/i// we will hear ; but let not God speak with us, lest we 



ie; and again, For who is there of all flesh, that hath heard V^t. 5, 
the i-oin&gt; of the Living God speaking out of the midst of the 
jir&lt;&gt;, a ml Ural ? If to hear the voice of God speaking would 
work death, how shall not the sight of God Himself minister 
death ? And why wonderest thou ? Even Moses himself saith, 
/ exceedingly fear i and quake, Heb.i2, 

14. What wouldest thou then ? that He who came for our 
salvation, should become the minister of death, men not bearing 
Him ? or that 1 [e should suit His grace to our level ? Daniel en 
dured not a vision of an Angel; and canst thou bear the sight of 
the Lord of Angels ? Gabriel appeared, and Daniel fell down: 
&lt;&gt;f what sort was he who appeared, and what was his form? 
His ,f((cf&gt; J/Y/.V (is the appearance of lightning, not as the sun ; Dan.io, 
and his eyes as lamps of fire , not as a furnace of fire; and 
th&lt;&gt; voice of his words was like the voice of a multitude, not 
as of twelve legions of angels: and yet the Prophet fell down. 
And the Angel came to him, saying, Fear not, Daniel ; stand vet. 12. 
upright ; be oj good &lt;-onrage, thy words have been heard. And n J 
Daniel says, / arose trembling: yet even thus he answeredver.il. 
not, until the likeness of a man s hand touched him. And 
when lie who had appeared was changed into a vision of -a 
man, then Daniel spake; and what says he? O my Lord^er.\6. 
by th&gt;&gt; vision my sorrows are turned upon me ; and there re 
mained no strength in me, neither is there breath left in m&lt;&gt;. 
If an Angel appearing took away the voice and strength of the 
Prophets, would the appearance of God have allowed him to 
breathe ? And until there touched me one like the appearance ver. 18. 
of a man, says the Scripture, Daniel took not courage. Thus 
a proof having been shewn of our weakness, the Lord took on 
Him what man required. For since man sought to be ad 
dressed by one of like countenance, the Saviour took on Him 

K 



130 Christ came in the flesh that what had destroyed might save us. 

LECT. a nature of like affections, that men might the more readily 
-^ be taught. 

TO o/u.aio- . 

15. But receive another reason also. Christ came that He 



ffO, 



might be baptized, and that He might sanctify Baptism : He 
came that He might work wonders, walking upon the waters 
U- of the sea. Since then before His coming in the flesh, the 
?J. sea saw Him and fled, and Jordan was driven back, the 
Lord took to Himself His body, that the sea might endure to 

3 behold Him, and that Jordan might without fear receive 
Him. This then is one reason: there is also a second. 
Since through Eve, a virgin, came death, it behoved that 
through a virgin, or rather from a virgin, should life appear; that 
as the serpent had deceived the one,^ so to the other Gabriel 
might bring good tidings. Men, having forsaken God, made 
images in the form of men ; since then that which was in the 
form of man was untruly worshipped, God became truly man, 
that the untruth might be destroyed. The devil had used the 
flesh as an instrument against us ; and this knowing, Paul 

Rom. 7,saith, But I see another l&lt;nr in my members, warring against 
the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity, and the 
rest. By those very weapons then have we been saved, by 
which the devil was vised to vanquish us. The Lord took of us 
a like nature with us, that He might save human nature. He 
took a like nature with vis, that to that which lacked He 
might give the larger grace ; that sinfvil humanity might be 

Rom. 5, made partaker of God. For where sin abounded, grace did 
much more abound. It behoved the Lord to suffer on our 
behalf ; bvit had the devil known Him, he had not dared to 

i Cor. 2, approach Him, for had they known it, they would not have 
crucified the Lord of Glory. His body then was made to 
bait death withal, to the end that the dragon hoping to devour 

vid. in- Him, might cast forth those whom he had already devoured. 

xiV. 17, For Death waxing mighty devoured; and again, The Lord 
9 - God will wipe away tears from off all faces. 

Sept. 16. Was Christ made man for novight ? are our doctrines 
mere inventions and human sophisms ? are not Holy Scrip 
tures our salvation ? are not the predictions of the Prophets ? 
- Keep then, I pray, this deposit undisturbed, and let no one 
remove thee ; believe that God was made man. That this 
was possible, has been proved ; but if the Jews persist in 



The time oj Christ s comiwj. 131 

disbelieving, let us hold this forth to them. What strange 
thing do we preach, saying that God was made man, when 
yourselves say, that Abraham entertained the Lord? What 
strange thing do we preach, when Jacob says, I have seen Gen. 32. 
G od face to face, and my life is preserved? The Lord who 
at i- with Abraham, has eaten with us also. What strange 
thing then do we preach ? But we present moreover two 
witnesses, who were with the Lord in Mount Sinai ; Moses 
was in the cliff of the rock ; and Elias was once in the cliftExod. 

33 22 

of the rock. These were present with Him in Mount Tabor 
when He was transfigured, and spake to His disciples of His Luke 9, 
decease, which He should accomplish at Jerusalem. It having 
then been proved possible, as I said before, for Him to be 
made man, the rest of the proofs may be left for the diligent 
to collect. 

17. But I promised above to find the time also of the (7.) 
advent of the Saviour, and the place: and I must not go away 
j convicted of falsehood, but rather send away the Church s 
i novices well guarded. Let us then inquire the time when the 
Lord came; since His advent is recent, and therefore excepted 
! against; and Christ Jesus is the same yesterday, to-day, owrfHeb.13, 
fur ever. Moses the Prophet says then, A Prophet shall the D eut 
Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto is, is. 
me. (Let the words, like unto me, be reserved awhile, and^tsV 
we will examine them in their proper place*.) But when 37 
| comes this expected Prophet ? Go back, he says, to my 
writings; search into the prophecy of Jacob spoken to Judah. 
\Judah, t/xni firt he whom thy brethren shall praise, and so Gen. 49, 
! forth, not to repeat the whole; and then. A Rider shall not 

7 ver. 10. 

fail nut of Jiu lull, nor a Chief tain from his loins, till He 
c&lt; mil* for whom it is reserved; and He is the expectation (not 
of the Jews, but) of the Gentiles. Thus he hath given as a 
sign of the coming of Christ, the ceasing of the Jewish rule. 

i If they are not now under the Romans, Christ is not yet come; 

| if they have a Ruler of the race of Judah and David, the ex- 

: pected one is not yet come. For I am ashamed to speak of 
their recent measures relative to their Patriarchs h , as they now 

8 This intention is not fulfilled in "West, as they were called, or Heads of 

the sequel of these Lectures. the Captivity in Judsea, vid. Basnage, 

h Concerning the Patriarchs of the History of the Jews, lib. iii^ They 

K 2 



The time of Christ s coming. 
LECT. call them, and what is the race of these men. and who is their 

\r TT 

- mother : but I leave it to those who know. But He who is 



to come, the Expectation of the Gentiles, what further sign 
Gen. 49, hath He? he says afterwards, binding His foal unto the vine; 
thou seest that foal clearly spoken of by Zecharias. 

18. But thou seekest again another testimony also respect- 

Ps. 2, 7. ing the time. The Lord, said unto Me, Thou art My Son, this 

ver. 9. &*}] hwe I begotten Thee: and after a little, Thou shalt rule 

Sept- them -with a rod of iron. I have already said that the kingdom 

of the Romans is plainly called a rod of iron ; Daniel however 

will supply for us what is wanting on this point. For when 

he relates and explains to Nebuchadnezzar the emblem of the 

statue, he tells him all he saw as regards it ; moreover that a 

Stone cut out of a mountain without hands, set up not by 

man s contrivance, should overpower the whole world. And 

Dan. 2, he speaks most openly, thus, And in the days of those king- 

44 - Se P t v/^/&gt;/.v ff/iff/l (he God of Heaven set up a kingdom u-Jiich shall 

nerer be destroyed, and (/&gt; kingdom thereof shall not be left 

to other people. 

(8 \ 19. But we seek yet more evidently the proof of the times 
of His coming ; for man, being hard of belief, unless he can 
clearly calculate the very years, gives no credence to what is 
spoken. What was the season then, and what manner of 
time was it ? when, the kings sprung from Judah failing, a 
stranger, Herod, succeeds to the kingdom. Therefore the 
Angel talking with Daniel says, (and mark now, I pray, the 
Dan. 9, words;) Knoiv therefore and understand, that from the going 
forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem 
unto Messiah the Prince, shall be seven ireeks and threescore 
a /id two week*. Now threescore and nine weeks of years make 
four hundred and eighty-three years. He said then, that 
after the building of Jerusalem four hundred and eighty-three 
years having elapsed, and the princes having failed, then 
there comes a certain stranger king, in whose time Messiah 
is born. Now Darius the Mede built the city in the sixth 
year of his kingdom, and in the first year of the sixty-sixth 

were of the tribe of Levi, and consisted Their residence was at Tiberias. They 

of a succession of chief governors by were called Governors of the West in 

lineal descent, from the time of Hadrian contrast to the Princes of the Captivity 

to the early part of the fifth century, at Babylon. 



The jtlace of Christ s routing. 133 

Olympiad, of the Greeks . (The Greeks call an Olympiad, the 
games u -Inch are celebrated every four years, on account of 
the day which in the course of four years of the sun s motion, 
is made up of the three hours over in each year.) And 
Herod reigns in the hundred and eighty-sixth Olympiad, 
in the fourth year thereof. Now from the sixty-sixth to the 
hundred and eighty-sixth, the intervening Olympiads are an 
hundred and twenty, and a little more. Now the hundred 
and twenty Olympiads make four hundred and eighty years. 
For the remaining three years are accounted for by the in 
terval between the first year and the fourth year. Thus hast 
thou the proof according to the Scripture, which says, From 
the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build 
Jerusalem, unto Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and 
threescore and two weeks. Of the times then thou hast for the 
present this proof, though there are other different interpreta 
tions of the aforesaid weeks of years spoken of in Daniel. 

20. But now attend to the place of the promise. Micah 
says, And thou, Bethlehem house of Ephratah, art not little Micah 
among the thousands ofJudah ; for out of thee shall He come ^ t , 
forth unto me, that is to be Elder in Israel ; whose goings 



forth have been from of old, from everlasting. Moreover, te d ia 
concerning the place, thou, being an inhabitant of Jerusa- ise P t&gt; 
lem, knowest beforehand what is written in the hundred 
and thirty-second Psalm, Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah, Ps. 132, 

L? 

and found it in the fields of the wood. For a few years ago 
the place was woody*. Again thou hast heard Habakkuk 
saying to the Lord, When the years dr&lt;nr nigh, Thou s/ialtilab. 3, 
be known ; when the time comes, Thou shall be shewn. And i&gt;ept * 

1 \^* A 

what is the sign, O Prophet, of the coming of the Lord? Hesepil 
sa\ s presently, In- the midst &lt;&gt;f two lives shall Thou be known; &"* ed - 
saying this plainly to the Lord, " When Thou shall come matter 
the I lesh, Thou shall live and die, and having risen from the Jheo(J - 

iet, in 
stead of 

1 i. e. B. C. 516-518. but this was the or the twentieth of the same king when 

BxthyearofDarinsHi -, notofDa- he commissioned Nebemiah. 

riu&lt;thrM. de, and the building of the City k Hadrian, as it appears, had planted 

begun ii) the twentieth of Artu - or dedicated a grove to Adonis near the 

Various dates are given for the com- grotto of the Nativity. (Hieron. Ep. ad 

mencement of the period; e. g. the Paulin. 13. ed. 1684.) Helena had cleared 

&gt;nd of Cyrus when the rebuilding it away about sixteen years before this 

of the Temple commenced, or the seventh Lecture was delivered. Ed. Ben. 
f A rtaxerxes, the date of Ezra s mission, 



134 The mock of Christ s coming. 

LECT. dead, shalt live again." And from what quarter round about 
Jerusalem comes He? From the East or the West, or the 



North or the South ? tell us exactly. And he answers most 

Ibid, plainly, and says, God shall come from Teman, (now Teman 
means south,) and the Holy One from Mount Paran, s/tfffly, 
woody. With which the Psalmist agreeing says, We found 
it in the plains of the w ood. 

21. Further, we seek, of whom, and how He comes. This 

is.7,i4.Esaias tells us, Be/told, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, 
and shall call His name Immanuel. Now the Jews contradict 
this doctrine ; for it is their way of old to be wretched assailants 
of the truth: and they say that it is not written, "virgin," but 
" damsel." But even granting this, still I find the same truth 

fuofitof here. For they must be asked, when does one who is assaulted 
cry out, and call for aid, after the outrage, or before it? If 
now the Scripture says elsewhere, The damsel cried, and there 

Deut. was none to help her, speaks it not of a virgin ? A further 

22, 27. p roo f that a virgin may be meant in Holy Scripture by 
" damsel," is found in the book of Kings, saying of Abishag the 

i Kings Shunammite, And the damsel was very fair ; for that she had 
4&gt; been chosen and brought to David a virgin, is confessed. 
(10.) 22. But the Jews say again, This was said to Ahaz concern- 

ls.7 11. ing Hezekiah. Read we then the Scripture, Ask thee a Sign 
of the Lord thy God; ask it cither in the depth, or in the height 
above. Now first of all, the Sign ought to be something ex 
traordinary : for that was a sign, when the water came from 
the rock ; and when the sea was divided ; and when the sun 
was turned backward, and the like. But next I observe, 
what is a still plainer confutation of the Jews. (I am aware 
that I am going into details, and that the hearers are wearied; 
yet suffer the multitudes of words, since it is for Christ s sake 
that these things are discussed, and they are not about com 
mon matters.) Now since Esaias spake this in the reign of 
Ahaz, and Ahaz reigned only sixteen years, and the pro 
phecy was spoken to him within these years, it confutes the 
objection of the Jews that the next king Hezekiah, the son 
of Ahaz, was five and twenty years old when he began 
to reign; and the prophecy being confined within sixteen 
years, he must have been begotten by Ahaz full nine years 
before the prophecy. Now what need was there to speak the 



The race of irhich Christ was born. 135 

prophecy concerning one already born, even before the reign 
of his father Ahaz ? For he said not, a virgin hath conceived, 
but, s/i all conceive, speaking as with foreknowledge. 

23. That the Lord was bom of a Virgin we know for 
certain ; now we must shew, of what race the Virgin was. 
The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David ; He will not turn Vs. 132, 
from it ; Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne. 
And again, His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and PS. 89, 

OO 

his t /i rone as the days of heaven. And afterwards, Once have 

9 ver. 35. 

I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David ; his 36. 37. 
seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before 
Me, and shall be established for ever as the moon. Thou seest 
that it is Christ, and not Solomon, who is spoken of; for 
Solomon s throne endured not as the sun. But if any one 
make it an objection that Christ sate not on the wooden throne 



itself of David, we may refer to the expression, The iSkrifef Mtt.28, 
(iud Pharisees sit on Moses scat; for this refers not to his 
wooden scat, but to the authority of his teaching. Thus inquire 
then for the throne of David, not for his wooden throne, 
but for his kingdom itself. And receive as witnesses of this Mat. 21, 
the children crying out, Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed 



is the King of Israel. And the blind men also say, Thou 13. 
San (if David, have mercy upon us. And Gabriel testifies 3 o. 



plainly, saying to Mary, And the Lord God shall give 

Him the throne of His father David. And Paul says, Re- 2 

mt&gt;mb&lt;&gt;r that Jesus Christ, of the seed of David, was raised*** 8. 

from the dcnd according to my Gospel. And in the begin 
ning of his Epistle to the Romans, he says, Which icas made^ om &gt; l &gt; 
Of the seed of David, according to the flesh. Receive thou 

! therefore Him who is born of David, obeying the prophecy 18 - 1] 

10. Sept 

which says, And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse ; quoted 
I and He that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in Him }l on j 

lo, \.i, 

shall the Gentiles trust. 

-M. All this sorely troubles the Jews. This Esaias also (11.) 

I foreknew, saying, And they shall be inlling, if they were Is- 9, 5. 
scorched vilh fire ; for unto us a Child hath been born, (not 

i to them,) even a Son, and hath been given unto us. But 
mark, that He was first the Son of God, then He was given 
unto us. And after a little, he says, And of His peace there ver - 7 
shall !&gt;P no bnund ; the Romans have their bounds, but of the 



136 The fash is not necessarily sinful. 

LECT. kingdom of the Son of God is there no bound ; the Persians 

XII 

and Medes have their bounds, but the Son has none ; he 

proceeds, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to 
order it. The Holy Virgin therefore was sprung from David. 

25. For it behoved the Purest, and the teacher of Purity, 

to come forth from a pure bride-chamber; for if he who 

**.Ss. fulfils well the office of Jesus priest refrains himself from 

I Cor. N omen, how should Jesus Himself to be born of man and 



7 - i- woman ? Because Thou art He, says the Psalmist, that drew 

Ps. 21 

(22, rec.-^fe out of the womb. Mark carefully the word, drew Me out 
of the womb, which means that He was born without man, 

10. Sept. v 

being drawn from the womb and flesh of the Virgin; for it is dif 
ferent in the case of them who are born of the marriage law. 

26. He is not ashamed to take flesh of such members, 
being the framer of these very members. And who tells us 

Jer. 1,5. this? The Lord says to Jeremiah, Before I formed thee m 
I fw belly, I knew thee; and before thou earnest forth out of 
the womb, I sanctijied thee. He, then, who in framing men, 
touches them and is not ashamed, should He be ashamed, in 
- fashioning for Himself His holy flesh, that veil of His God- 
head ? It is God who even now forms babes in the womb, as 

Job 10, it is written in Job, Hast thou not poured me out as milk, and 
curdled me like cheese * Thou hast clothed me with skin 
and fash, and hast fenced me with bones and sinews. There 
is nothing in man s frame shocking, except thou pollute it 
with adulteries and licentiousness. He who made Adam, 
made Eve also, and male and female were fashioned by the 

vlujZi Divine hands; nothing in the body is shocking, as framed 
at the beginning. Let the mouths of all the heretics be 
stopped 1 , who slander the body, yea rather, Him who 

l Cor. 6, formed it : but let us remember the saying of Paul, Know 
ye not that your bodies are the temples of the Holy Ghost, 
u-hich is in you ? And again, the Prophet, speaking in the 

Hos. 9, person of Jesus, foretold, saying, My flesh is of them. 

Mi c 8 . 6 !! And elsewhere is i1; written, Therefore He shall give them 

3. Sept! //// the time of her who beareth ; and what is the Sign ? He 

says afterwards, She shall bring forth, and the rest of their 

Brethren shall return. And what is the nuptial pledge of 

Hos. 2, the Virgin, the holy Bride ? / will even betroth thee unto 

*" " 

1 The Manichees, &c. 



Jcics and 1 ayiws btliccc /// inys c/.v hard as the birth from a I iryin. 1 37 

Me in faithfulness. And Elisabeth in like manner speaking 

to her savs And blessed is she which believed; for there shalllj&s, \, 

A. 

fn&gt; " j/rrformance of those things which were told her of the 



27. But both Greeks and Jews harass us with their allega- (12.) 
lion, that it was impossible that Christ should be born of a 
virgin. We may silence the Greeks out of their own fables. 

For ye who tell that stones, when thrown, became men, how 
sav ye that it is impossible for a virgin to bear? Ye who in 
your legends relate that a daughter was born from the brain, 
how say ye that it is impossible for a son to have been born 

! from a virgin womb ? Ye who assert the fiction that Bacchus 
was born from the thigh of your Jupiter, how is it that ye set 
at nought our truth ? I know that I am speaking what is 
unnecessary for the present hearers ; but we put these things 
before thee, that thou mayest have the opportunity of retort 
ing them on the Greeks, attacking them out of their own 

I fables. 

28. Meet, however, those of the circumcision with this 
question ; which is the difficult thing, for an aged woman, 
barren, and past age, to bear, or for a virgin in her youth 
to have a child? Sarah was barren, and though it had 
ceased to be with her after the manner of women, yet con 
trary to nature she bore a child. If then it be contrary to 
nature for a barren woman and for a virgin to bear, either 
reject both or receive both; for it is the same God who 
wrought the one, and provided the other. For thou wilt not 
dare to say, that in one case it was possible for God so to do, 
and not in the other. And again, what kind of nature is it, 
for a man s hand to be changed in one hour to another 
appearance, and to be restored again? How then was Moses 
hand made white as snow, and at once restored again ? 
Hut thou sayest that God by so willing changed it. Is God, 
by willing, able in that instance, and is He not in this ? And 
that was a sign which related only to the Egyptians; but 
this was a Sign given to the whole world. O ye Jews, which 
is the more difficult, for a virgin to bear a child, or for a rod 
t&lt;&gt; be quickened into a living creature? Ye own that in the 

*e of Move-, a perfectly straight rod taking the form of 
a serpent was terrible to him who had cast it down; so 



138 Things natural as stranye as the birth from a Viryin. 

LECT. that he who had before held it as a rod, now fled from 
it as a dragon. For it was in truth a dragon ; but he fled, 
not being afraid at what he had held, but being filled 
with terror at Him who had changed it. The rod had 
teeth and eyes of a dragon ; shall now eyes which see be 
produced from a rod, and shall not a child be born from a 
virgin s womb at Ged s will ? For I mention not that the 
rod of Aaron also in one night did that which other trees are 
many years in accomplishing. For who knows not, that a 
rod when it has lost its bark, will never sprout forth, even 
though it be set in the midst of streams ? Yet since God 
follows not, but makes, the natures of trees, the fruitless and 
withered and barkless rod, flowered and budded, and bore 
almonds. Has not then He, who bestowed fruit on this 
rod supernaturally, for the sake of the typical High-priest, 
granted to the Virgin to bear a son, for the sake of the 
True? 

(13.) 29. These are good heads of argument; however, the 
Jews still contradict, and do not feel the force of tins 
reference to the rod, because it is not a reference to births, 
like this, strange and contrary to nature. Ask them then the 
following questions : Of whom at the beginning was Eve 
begotten ? What mother conceived her, who had none ? 
But the Scripture says that she was made from the side 
of Adam. Was then Eve boni without a mother from the 
side of man, and may not a child be bom without a father, 
from a virgin s womb ? A benefit was owing to men from 
womankind; for Eve sprung from Adam, not conceived by a 
mother, but, as it were, brought forth by man alone. Mary 
then repaid the benefit, not by man, but immaculately by 
herself, conceiving by the Holy Ghost, through the power of 
God. 

30. But let us take something yet greater than this ; for 
that bodies should be born of bodies, though it be strange, is 
nevertheless possible. But that the dust of the earth should 
be made a man, this is more wonderful ; that clay mixed 
together should become the coats and brightness of the eye, 
is more wonderful. That from dust, one in its appearance, 
should spring at once the hardness of the bones and the 
delicateness of the lungs, and the other different sorts of 



The conception of Christ immaculate. 139 

members, this is wonderful. That clay should be quickened, 
and should traverse the world, self-moved, and build houses, 
this is wonderful. That clay should teach, and speak, and 
follow crafts, and reign, this is wonderful. Whence then, O 
most shallow Jews, was Adam made ? Did not God take 
dust from the earth, and mould this wondrous creature ? 
Shall clay then be changed into an eye, and a virgin not 
bear a son ? Does that which is, of the two, impossible 
among men come to pass, and not that which is possible ? 

81. Let us keep these things in mind, brethren ; let us (14.) 
employ these weapons of defence. Let us not endure those 
heretics who teach a mere visionary advent. Let us loathe 
them also, who say that the birth of the Saviour was of a 
man and woman, and who dare to say that it was of Joseph and 
Mary, because it is written, And he took unto him his wife. Mat. i, 
For let us call to mind Jacob, who before he had received 
Rachel said to Laban, Give me my wife ; for like as she, in Gen 29 . 
virtue of the promise only, was called the wife of Jacob, 
before the marriage took place, so also Mary, in that she 
was betrothed, was called the wife of Joseph. And behold 
the exactness of the Gospel, which says, And in the sixth uk lf 
month the Angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of 
Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man 
vhose name was Joseph, and so forth ; and again, when the 
taxing was, and Joseph went up to be taxed, what saith the 
Scripture ? and Joseph also went up from Galilee, to be taxed Lu ke2, 
with Mory his espoused wife, being great with child. For 
though she was great with child, yet said he not, " with his 
wife," but "with his espoused wife." For God sent forth Gal.4,4. 
His Son, says Paul, made, not of a man and woman, but 
of a woman only, that is of a Virgin ; for we have before 
shewed, that a virgin is also called a woman; for of a virgin 

us 1 le born, who makes souls virgins. 

^2. But thou wonderest at the event; she also wondered** - 
who bore Him, for she savs to Gabriel, How shall &* fe, Lukel, 

O A O C 

seeing I know not a man ? But he says to her, The Holy 
Ghost shall come vj&gt;&lt;&gt;n t/iee, and the power of the Highest 
*/!&lt;/// nn-rshndow thce ; therefore also that Holy Thing which 
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God. Imma 
culate and undefiled was His birth, for where the Holy 



140 The excellence of Viryinity. 

LECT. Ghost breathes, there all pollution is taken away : undenled 
L was the birth in the flesh of the Only-begotten from the 



. Though heretics should deny the truth, the Holy 
Ghost shall convict them ; that overshadowing Power of the 
Highest shall wax wroth with them, Gabriel shall confront 
them in the day of judgment ; the place of the manger, which 
received its Lord, shall overwhelm them with shame. The 
shepherds shall testify, who then received the glad tidings ; and 
Luke 2, the host of Angels praising and chanting and saying, Glory to 
KIO.S, Grod in the highest, and on earth peace to men oj good will ; 
c y nl - and the Temple, into which He was then brought on the 
volunta- fortieth day ; and the pair of turtle-doves, which were offered 

4 * \ *" 1 

gate ii- f r H* m m an ^ Symeon, who then took Him in his arms, and 
Jo*;*, Anna the Prophetess, who was there present. 

33. Since then God bears witness, and the Holy Ghost 
John 7, with Him, and Christ says, Why go ye about to kill Me, a 

1 Q ~i f i ( 1 

8 &gt; 4o. Man that hath told you the truth, let the heretics be silent 
who speak against His manhood ; for they speak against Him 

Luke24, w ho said, Handle Me, and see ; for a spirit hath not flesh 
and bones, as ye see Me have. Adored be the Lord the Vir 
gin-born, and let the Virgins understand what is the crown of 
their condition. Also let the order of Solitaries understand 
the renown of chastity ; for we too are allowed the same 
dignity. For nine months was the Saviour in the womb of 
the Virgin ; but the Lord was a Man for three and thirty 
years : so that if a virgin has to boast of those nine months, 
much more we of those many years. 
(15.) 34. But run we all by the grace of God the race of chastity, 

Ps. 148, young men and maidens, old men and children ; not going 
after licentiousness, but praising the name of Christ. Let us 
not be ignorant of the glory of chastity ; for its crown is 
angelic, and its perfection superhuman. Let us be chary of 
these our bodies, which are to shine as the sun ; let us not 
for a little pleasure, pollute a body such and so constituted ; 
for the sin is small and only for an hour, but the shame is for 
many years, yea, eternal. Angels on earth are they, who 
follow chastity ; the Virgins have their part with Mary the 
Virgin. Let all vain ornament be banished away, and every 

m This reason for the offering is com- Leviticus 12, 6. specifies /&gt;rtly the purifi- 
monly given by the Fathers; the text in cation of the Mother. 



Prurf trnl cd hnftatioH. \ \ \ 

hurtful look, and all wanton gait, and dress, and perfumes, 
which are the baits of pleasure. The perfume of all of us be 
the prayer of sweet savour, even of good works, and the 
sanctification of our bodies ; that the Lord Virgin-born 
inav say of us also, both of men who keep their chastity, and 
of women who receive the crown, I will dwell in them, and 2 Cor. 6, 

1 f^ 

\ralk in them ; and I will be their God, and they shall be My 
people: To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 



LECTURE XIII. 



ON THE CRUCIFIXION AND BURIAL OF CHRIST. 



Isaiah liii. 1, 7. 

Who hath believed our report ? and to whom is the arm of 
the Lord revealed ? . . . . He is brought as a lamb to the 
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so 
He openeth not His mouth. 

LECT. 1. EVERY deed of Christ is a boast of the Catholic Church, 
XIIL but her boast of boasts is the Cross ; and knowing this, Paul 
Gal. 6, says, But Ood forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of 
Christ. For wondrous indeed it was, that he who was blind 
from his birth should recover his sight in Siloam ; but what 
is this compared with the blind of the whole world ? It was 
a great thing, and passing nature, for Lazarus to rise again 
after four days; but this grace extended to him alone, and 
what was it compared with the dead in sin throughout the 
world ? Marvellous was it, that t ve loaves should issue forth 
into food for the five thousand; but what is that to those who 
are famishing in ignorance through all the world ? It was 
marvellous that she should have been loosed who had been 
bound by Satan eighteen years : yet what is this to all of us, 
who are fast bound in the chains of our sins? Now the glory 
of the Cross has led into light those who were blind through 
ignorance, has loosed all who were held fast by sin, and has 
ransomed the whole world of men. 

2. And wonder not that the whole world was ransomed; 
for it was no mere man, but the only-begotten Son of God, 
who died on its behalf. And yet one man s sin, even Adam s, 
Rom. 5, na( j power to bring death to the world ; but if by one man s 

-* * 

offence death reigned over the world, how shall not life much 



The Drri/ff scared by the Sign of thf (/rosy. 14:3 

nither reign by the righteousness of One ? And if because of 
the tree of food they were thus cast out of paradise, shall not 
believers now because of the Tree of Jesus, much more easily 
enter into paradise ? If the first man formed out of the earth 
brought in universal death, shall not He who formed him out 
of the earth bring in everlasting life, being Himself Life? John 14, 
If Phinees, when he waxed zealous and slew the evil-doer, 
^topped the wrath of God, shall not Jesus, who slew not 
another, but gave up Himself for a ransom, put away the l Tim. 
wrath which is against men ? 

3. Let us then not be ashamed of the Cross of our Saviour, (o.) 
but rather glory in it. For the preaching of the Cross is unto l Cor. l, 
the Jeii-s a stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness, 
but to us salvation : and to them that perish it is foolishness, 
but unto us which are saved it is the power of God. For it 
was not a mere man who died for us, as I said before, but the 
Son of God, God made man. Further; if under Moses a 
lamb kept the destroyer at a distance, did not much rather the 
Lnnb ft/ God, which taketh away the sins of the world, deliver John l, 
us from our sins? The blood of a brute animal gave 29 * 
salvation; and shall not the Blood of the Only -begotten 
much rather save ? If any disbelieve the power of the 
Crucified, let him inquire of the devils ; if any believe not 
words, let him believe what he sees. Many have been 
crucified throughout the world, but by none of these are the 
devils scared ; but Christ having been crucified for us, when 
they see but the Sign of the Cross, they shudder. For those 
died for their own sins, but Christ for the sins of others ; for 
He lid no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth. It isi Pet. 2, 
not Peter who says this, for then might we suspect that he 15*53? 

- partial to his Teacher; but it is Esaias who says it, not 
indeed present with Him in the flesh, but in the Spirit con 
templating aforetime His coming in the flesh. Yet why now 
bring the Prophet only as a witness? receive the witness of 
Pilate himself who gave sentence upon Him, saying, /^/mc? Luke 23, 

fault in this Mnn. : and who, when he gave Him up&gt; 
Cashes his hands, and said, / am innocent of the blood of Mat. 27, 
tin* just person. There is yet another witness of the sinless- 24 
ness of Jesus, the robber, the first man admitted into 

paradise; who rebuked his fellow, and said, " We recei ve v. Luke 

23, 41. 



144 The &gt;!t the world.. 

LECT. the due r&gt; ^ nf our deeds ; tmt this Man hath done nothing 

-amiss ; for we were present, botli thou and I, at His judg 
ment." 

4. Jesus then really suffered for all men ; for the Cross was 

le*ttfif. no illusion, otherwise our redemption is an illusion also. 
His death was not in appearance, for then is our salvation 
also a tale. If His death was but in appearance, they were 

Mat. 27, true who said, We remember that that deceiver t sy//V, while 

f\*% 

He was yet alive, After three days I will rise ayain. His 
passion then was real ; for He was really crucified, and we 
are not ashamed thereat. He was crucified, and we deny it 
not, nay, I will rather glory to speak of it. For though I 
should now deny it, this Golgotha confutes me near which we 
vid.supr. are now assembled ; the wood of the Cross confutes me, which 
io.x.19. nas fr m hence been distributed piecemeal to all the world. 
I confers the Cross, because I know of the Resurrection ; for 
if, after being crucified, He had remained as He was, I had 
not perchance confessed it, for I might have hidden it with 
my Master ; but now that the Resurrection has followed the 
Cross, I am not ashamed to declare it. 

(3.) -5. Being then in the flesh like others, He was crucified, but 
not for like sins. For He was not led to death for covetous- 
ness, in that He was the Teacher of poverty ; nor was He 
condemned for concupiscence, for He Himself says plainly, 
Mat. 5, Whosoever shall look upon a w&lt;&gt;/n&lt;m to lust after her, hath 
already committed adultery with her; not for smiting or 
striking hastily, for lie turned the other cheek also to the 
smiter ; not for despising the Law, for He was the fulfiller of 
the Law ; not for reviling a prophet, for it was Himself who 
was proclaimed by the Prophets ; not for defrauding any of 
their hire, for He ministered without reward and freelv. He 

w 

1 Pet, 2, sinned not in words, or deeds, or thoughts, who did no sin, 
22. 23. ne nh er was guile found in his mouth ; who when He was 

reviled, reviled not again ; when He suffered, He threatened 

not ; who came to His passion, not unwillingly, but willingly, 
Mat. 16, yea, should any dissuading Him say even now, Be it far 
22. 23. f rom Thee, Lord, He will say again, Get thee behind Me, 

Satan. 

6. And wouldest thou be persuaded that He came to His 

passion willingly ? others die without their own will, in thai 



". l H i &gt; v 1 - 



they know not of their death; but He spoke before of II. 

ission. Behold, the Son of man is betrayed to be ! . Mat. 26, 

But knowest thou wherefore this Friend of man shunned not " 
death : It was lest the whole world should perish in its sins. 
Behold, we no U)j to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall b&lt;- r. Mat. 

20 18 

betrayed, and shall be crucified; and again, He stedfastly ^L U ke9 t 
His face to go to Jerusalem. And wouldest thou know cer-oi- 
tainly, that the Cross is a glory to Jesus? Hear His own 
words, not mine. Judas set about betraying Him, being 
ungrateful to the Master of the house. Having but just now 
gone forth from His table, and drunk His cup of blessing, yet 
in return for that draught of salvation he sought to shed 
righteous blood. He who did eat of His bread, lifted up his?*. 41, 
heel against Him; his hands were but lately receiving the 
blessed gifts , and within a little while for the wages of 
treason he was plotting His death. And being reproved, and 
having heard that word, Thou hast said, he again went out: Mat. 26, 
then said Jesus, The hour is come, that the Son of man should 1 * 
be glorified. Thou seest how He knew the Cross to be His 03 . 
proper glorv. Further, was Esaias when he was sawn a sun- vid. 
der not ashamed, and shall Christ be ashamed when dying Cat. ii. 



for the world: JVo&gt;/- is the Son of man gloriji Not but 14 - 
that He had glory before: for He was glorified with the glory ^ 
which was before the foundation of the world. He was glori- John 17, 
fied as God ever ; but now He was glorified in bearing the 
Crown of His patience. He gave not up His life by force, 
nor was He put to death violently, but of His own accord. 
Hear what He MJI : / have power to lay down My life, tf;?// J hnio, 
I have power to take it again : I yield it of My own choice 

My enemies ; for unless I chose, this could not be. He 
came therefore of His own set purpose to His passion. re- 
joking in His noble deed, smiling at the crown, cheered by 
the salvation of men ; not ashamed of the Cros, for it saved 
the world. For it was no common man who suffered, but 
God in man s nature, striving for the prize of His patience. 

7. But the Jews contradict, ever ready, as they are, to 
cavil, and backward to believe; so that for this cause the 

1 rat tl&gt;.iy!f. The word has this signify consecrated bread, distinct from 
meaning in Chrysostom and Cyril of that of the Eucharist. Vid. Bingham 
Alexandria also ; afterward* it came to Antiq. xv. 4. . 3. 



1 lt&gt; All thinys &gt;nn riiiit&lt;j ( hrist are in the 

LECT. Prophet in the text says, Lord, icho hath believed our report / 

Persians believe, and Hebrews believe not; they shall see, 

ywff. to whotn He iras not spoken of, and they that have not heard 

shall understand, while they who study these things, shall set 

,-,. at nought what they study. They speak against us, and say, 



" Does the Lord then suffer ? what ? had men s hands power 
from is. over His sovereignty ?" Head the Lamentations ; for in those 
Lamentations, Jeremias, lamenting you, has written what 
is worthy of lamentations. He saw your destruction, he 
beheld your downfall, he bewailed Jerusalem which then 
Gal. 4, was; for that u hich note is shall not be lamented for; for 
25 that Jerusalem crucified Christ, but that which now is 
Lam. 4, worships Him. Lamenting then he says, The breath of our 
20. Sept. countenattee, the 1 .ord ( hrist teas taken in our corruptions. 
Am I stating views of my own ? Behold he testifies of the 
Lord Christ seized by men. And what follows from this : 

V 

Ibid. Tell me, O Prophet. He says, Of whom we said. Under His 
shadoie we shall live among lite heathen. For he correctly 
signifies that the grace of life shall no longer dwell in Israel, 
but among the heathen. 

8. But since their gainsayings are many, come, let me, with 
the help of your prayers, (as the shortness of the time may 
allow,) set forth through the Lord s grace some few testi 
monies concerning the Passion. For all things concerning 
Christ are put into writing, and nothing is doubtful, for 

ip*(Tt&gt;- nothing is without a text. All things are inscribed on 
the monuments of the Prophets; clearly written not on 
tablets of stone, but by the hand of the Holy Ghost. Since 
then thou hast heard the Gospel speaking concerning Judas, 
oughtest thou not to be furnished with the testimony to it ? 
Thou hast heard that He was pierced in the side by a spear ; 
oughtest thou not to see whether this also is written ? Thou 
hast heard tfrat He was crucified in a garden ; oughtest 
thou not to see whether this also is written? Thou hast 
heard that He was sold for thirty pieces of silver ; oughtest 
thou not to learn what prophet spake this ? Thou hast heard 
that He was given vinegar to drink ; learn where this also is 
written. Thou hast heard that His body was laid in a rock, 
and that a stone was set over it ; oughtest thou not to icceive 
this testimony also from the prophet ? Thou hast heard that 



J \ rc&lt;nn&lt; toScr.not to diacoverjntt to prove irhat we hare been taught. 1 47 

1 1 c was crucified with robbers ; oughtest thou riot to ser 
whether tliis also is written ? Thou hast heard that He was 
buried ; oughtest thou not to see, whether the circumstances 
of His burial are any where undoubtedly written ? Thou hast 
heard that He rose again ; oughtest thou not to see whether 
we mock thee not, teaching these things ? For oitr speech 1 Cor. 
and our preaching is not with enticing words of man s wisdom. * 
We stir now no sophistical contrivances ; for these are ex 
posed ; we do not conquer words with Words, for these come 
to an end ; but we preach Christ Crucified, who has already 
been preached aforetime by the Prophets. But thou, I pray, 
having received the testimonies, seal them in thine heart. 
And, since they are many, and the rest of our time is narrowed 
into a short space, listen now to a few, (as many as is possible,) 
and those the chief ones ; and having received these begin 
nings, be diligent and seek out the remainder. Let not thine Vid.Ec- 



hand be only stretched out to receive, but let it be also ready J^ 8 
to work. God bestows every thing. For if any of yon lack jam. 1, 
wisdom, let him ask of God who giveth, and he shall receive. 5 * 
May He through your prayer, grant speech to us who address 
you, and faith to you who hear. 

9. Let us then seek the texts in proof of the Passion of (5.) 
Christ : for we are met together, not now to make an abstract huprt- 
exposition of the Scriptures, but rather to be made assured of*^. * 1 * 
the things which we already believe. Now thou hast received 
from me, first the testimonies concerning the coming of Jesus ; 
and concerning His walking on the sea, (for Thy way is in p s . 77, 
the sea,) it is written, Who walketh on the sea, as on a pave- * : 9 
ment. And concerning divers cures thou hast elsewhere Sept. 
received testimony. Now therefore I begin from whence the 
Passion began. Judas was the traitor who came against Him, 
and stood, speaking words of peace, but plotting war. The 
Psalmist then says conceming him, My friends and My l s. 38, 
neighbours drew near against Me, and stood. And again, p s 
His words were softer Hunt oil, yet were they drawn swords. 21 
Hail, Master, and he betrayed his Master to death ; he was 
not moved with his warning, when He said, Judas, betrayest 
thou the Son of man with a kiss ? saying, as it were, this to 
him, Recollect thine own name ; Judas means confession ; 
thou hast come to terms, thou hast received the money, make 

T *&gt; 

1*4 



Prophecy of I he Thirty Pieces (/Silver. 

LECT. confession quickly. Hold not Thy peace, O God of My praise; 
for the mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of the deceitful, 

J A I , j 

1_3. are opened against Me ; they have spoken against Me with a 
lying tongue, tliey have compassed Me about also with words 
of hatred. But that some of the chief-priests also were 
present, and that the bonds were before the gate of the city, 
thou hast heard before, if thou rernemberest b the exposition 
of the Psalmist, who has told the time and the place ; how 

Ps. 59, they returned at evening, and hungered like dogs, and 
encompassed the city. 

10. Attend also in respect to the thirty pieces of silver. 

Zech.il, And I will say to them, If it be good in your siglit, give me 



&gt; P my price, or refuse, and the rest. One price is owing to Me 
from you for My healing the blind and lame, and I receive 
another; for thanksgiving, dishonour, for worship, insult. 

Ibid. Beholdest thou how the Scripture foresaw these things ? And 
tlieij appointed My price at thirty pieces of silver. How 
exact the prophecy ! how great and unerring is the wisdom of 
the Holy Ghost ! For he said, not ten, nor twenty, but thirty, 
exactly as many as there were. Tell also what became of 
this value, O Prophet! Does he who received it keep it? 
or does he restore it ? and after it was restored, what becomes 

Ib.v. 13. of it? The Prophet then says, And I took the thirty pieces 
of silver, and cast them into the house of the Lord, into the 
refining house. Compare the Gospel with the Prophecy: 

Mat27,7tM&i*, it says, repented himself, and cast down the pieces 
of silver in the temple, and departed. 

(Q\ 11. But now the exact solution of this seeming discrepancy 
shall be given. For they who make light of the prophets, 
allege that the Prophet says on the one hand, And I cast 
them into the house of the Lord, into the refining house, but 
the Gospel on the other hand, And they gave them for the 
potters Jield. Listen then how they may be both true. For 
those conscientious Jews forsooth, the high-priests of that time, 
seeing Judas repenting and saying, / have sinned, in that I 
have betrayed the innocent blood, reply, What is that to us, see 
thou to that. Is it then nothing to you, the crucifiers ? but 
shall he who received and restored the price of murder see to 
it, and shall ye the murderers not see to it ? Then they say 

*&gt; Alluding to some Homily distinct from these Lectures. Ed. Ben. 



cy of our Lord s seizure ami trial. 149 

among themselves, It is not lawful to cast them into the 
treasury, because it is the price of blood. Out of your own 
mouths is your condemnation ; if the price is polluted, so is 
the deed polluted ; but if thou art fulfilling righteousness in 
crucifying Christ, why receivest thou not the price of it? 
But the point of enquiry is, how the two do not disagree, the 
Gospel saying, the potters field, and the Prophet, the 
refining house. But not only people who are goldsmiths, or 
brass-founders, have refining houses ; but potters also have ^h,. 
them for their clay. For when they have sifted off the fine 
and delicate and useful earth from the rubbish^ and separated 
from it the mass of the refuse matter, they first mould up the 
clay with water, that they may work it with ease into the 
forms intended. Why then wonderest thou that the Gospel 
says plainly the potters field, whereas the Prophet spoke his 
prophecy like an enigma, since prophecy is in many places 
enigmatical ? 

12. They bound Jesus, and led Him to the hall of the (?) 
High-priest. And wouldest thou know and be sure that this 

also is written ? Esaias says, Woe unto their soul, for they i s . 3, 9 
hare taken evil counsel against themselves, saying, Let ?^- 10&lt;Se P 
bind the Just, for He is troublesome to us. And truly, Woe 
wito their soul! Let us see how. Esaias was sawn asunder, yet 
after this the people was restored. Jeremias was cast into 
the mire of the dungeon, yet was the wound of the Jews 
healed ; for it was the less, in that it was a sin against man. 
But when the Jews sinned, not against man, but against God in 
man s nature, Woe unto their soul! He says, Let us bind the 
Just; could He not then set Himself free? some one will say; 
He, who freed Lazarus from the bonds of death after four days, 
and loosed Peter from the iron bands of his prison ? Angels 
stood around ready, saying, Let us burst their bands in sunder ; 
but they hold back, because their Lord was pleased to 
undergo it. Again, He was led to the judgment- seat before 
the Elders; thou hast already the testimony to this, The is. 3, 14 
Lord trill t-orne into judgment iritk the ancients of His people , 
/ I he jirinrrs thereof. 

13. And the High-priest having questioned Him, and 
heard the truth, is wroth ; and the wicked minister of wicked 
men smites Him; and the countenance, which had shone as 



150 Prophecy of indignities offered to our Lord. 

LECT. the sun, endured to be smitten with lawless hands. Others 
coining spat on the face of Him, who by His spittle had 



healed one who was blind from his birth. Do ye thus requite 
the Lord, O foolish people and unwise ? And the Prophet 

ls.53,1. wondering, says, Lord, who hath believed our report? for the 
thing is incredible, that God, the Son of God, and the Arm of 
the Lord, should suffer such things. But that they who are 

? saved may not disbelieve, the Holy Ghost writes before, in 
the person of Christ, who says, (for He who then spake these 



saved, things, was afterward an actor in them.) / gave My back to 

vid.supr. .. . 

introd. the scourges ; for Pilate, having scourged Him, delivered Him 
to be crucified; and My cheeks to smi tings; and My face I 
6 - turned not away from the shame of spittings ; saying, as it 
were, " Though knowing before that they will smite Me, I 
did not even turn My cheek aside ; for how should I have 
nerved My disciples against death for truth s sake, had I 

Jolml2, Myself sunk under this ?" I said, He who loveth his Itfe shall 

vO 

lose it ; if I had loved My life, how could I have taught, not 
doing what I taught ? First then, being Himself God, He 
endured to suffer these things at the hands of men ; that after 
this, we men, when we suffer such things at the hands of 
men for His sake, might not be ashamed. Thou seest that 
the prophets have clearly written of these things also. Many 
however of the Scripture testimonies must be passed over, 
for want of time ; for if one should exactly search out all, not 
one of the things concerning Christ would be left without 
witness. 

14. And having been bound, He came from Caiaphas to 

Hos. 10, Pilate, is this too written ? yes ; And having bound Him, they 

/g \ led Him away as a present to the king of Jarim. Here some 

hasty hearer will object, " Pilate was not a king," (to leave for 

a while the main part of the question,) "how then having bound 

Him, led they Him to the king ?" But read thou the Gospel ; 

Luke 23, When Pilate heard that He was of Galilee, he sent Him to 
Herod ; for Herod was then king, and was present at Jeru 
salem. And now observe the exactness of the Prophet ; for 

Luke23, he says, that He was sent as a present ; for the same day 
Pilate and Herod were made friends together, for before 
they were at enmity between themselves. For it became Him 
who was on the eve of making peace in earth and heaven, to 



Prophecy of mockeries undergone by our Lord. 151 

make His very judges the iirst to be at peace between them- 
Ives; for the Lord was there present, who reconciles &lt;/^ 

24 Sept. 

heart x of Uic princes of the ear tit. See the exactness and w h ere it 
true testimony of the Prophet. means to 

i -IT a l ter &gt; or 

15. Look with awe then at the Lord while He was judged, prevent. 
He endured to be led and carried by the soldiers. Pilate sat 

in judgment, and lie who sitteth on the right hand of the 
Father, stood and was judged. The people whom He had 
redeemed from the land of Egypt, and ofttimes from other 
places, shouted against Him, Away with Him, away with 
Him, crucify Him. Wherefore, O ye Jews? because He 
lias healed your blind ? or because He has made your lame 
to walk, and bestowed His other benefits ? So that the 
Prophet in amazement speaks of this too, Against whom have Is. 57, 
ye opened your mouth, and against whom have ye let loose 4 oept 
your tongue ? and the Lord Himself says in the Prophets, 
Mine heritage is unto Me as a lion in the forest ; it crieth out Jet. 12, 
against Me; therefore have I hated it. I have not refused 
them, but they have refused Me; wherefore it follows that I 
say, / have forsaken My house. ver. 7. 

16. When He was judged, He held His peace ; so that 
Pilate was moved for Him, and said, Hearest Thou not what 
these witness against Thee ? Not that he knew Him who was 
judged, but he feared his own wife s dream of which news had 
been sent to him. And Jesus held His peace. The Psalmist 
says, / was as a man that heareth not ; and in whose mouth Ps. 38, 
are no reproofs ; and again, But I as a deaf man heard not ; L^ 13 
and I was as a dumb man that opencth not his mouth. 
Thou hast before heard c concerning this, if thou remember- 

est it. 

17. But the soldiers who surrounded Him, mock Him, and (9.) 
their Lord becomes a sport to them, and their Master is turned 

into jest by them. When they looked on Me, they shaked Ps. 109, 
their heads. Yet there is the figure of kingly state ; for 
though they mock, yet do they bend the knee. And the 
xtldkrs crucify Him, having first put on Him a purple 
robe, and they set a crown on His head; for what though it 
be of thorns ? Every king is proclaimed by soldiers ; it be- 
ae Jesus too in a figure to have been crowned by soldiers ; 

e Not in anv extant work. 



15*2 Correspondence between Clirisfs crucifixion and Adam s fall. 

LECT. so that for this cause the Scripture says in the Canticles, Go 

" ni .forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold Kiny Solomon in 

11^ the crown wherewith His mother crowned Him. And the 

crown itself was a mystery ; for it was a remissal of sins, a 

dismissal of the curse. 

Gen. 3, 18. Adam received the doom, Cursed is the ground for thy 

17 18 

sake; thorns also and thistles shall it briny forth to fhee. 

For this cause Jesus assumes the thorns, that He might 
cancel the doom ; for this cause also was He buried in the 
earth, that the cursed earth might receive, instead of the 
curse, the blessing. At the time of the sin, they clothed 
themselves with fig-leaves; for this cause Jesus also made 
the fig-tree the last of His signs. For when about to go 
to His passion, He curses the fig-tree, not every fig-tree, 
Mark but that one alone, for the sake of the figure; saying, A r o 
wore let man eat fruit of thee ; be the doom cancelled. 

If 

And because at the former time they clothed themselves with 
fig-leaves, He came at a season when food is not wont 
to be found on the fig-tree. Who knows not that in winter- 
time the fig-tree bears no fruit, but is clothed with leaves 
only ? Was Jesus ignorant o f this, which all knew ? No, but 



rec. text, though He knew, yet He came as if seeking, not ignorant 
that He should not find, but extending the emblematical 
curse to the leaves only. 

19. And having touched on things connected with Para 
dise, I am astonished truly at the truth of the types. In 
Paradise was the Fall, and in a Garden was our Salvation. 

Gen. 3, From the Tree came sin, and until the Tree sin lasted. In the 

o 

evening, when the Lord (calked in the Garden, they hid them 
selves ; and in the evening the robber is brought by the Lord 
(10.) into Paradise. But some one will say to me, " These are 
views of thine own ; shew me from some prophet the Wood 
of the Cross ; except thou give me a testimony from a pro 
phet, I will not be persuaded." Hear now from Jeremias, 

Jer. 11, and assure thyself; I am as a harmless lamb led to be 
9 - Se P l - slaughtered ; did I not know it ? (for in this manner read it, 

Mat.26, as a question, as I have read it ; for He who said, Ye know 
that after two days is the feast of the passover, and the Son 
of Man is betrayed to be crucified, did He not know ?) / am 
as a harmless lamb led to be slaughtered; did I not know if? 



" """ 



Prophetical types of the Cross. 153 

(but what sort of lamb ? let John the Baptist interpret it, 
when he says, Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away^ Q \ in \ ) 
the sin of the world.) They have devised against Me a 29 - 
wicked device, saying, (He who knows the devices, knew He jg/ 
not the result of them? And what said they?) Come, and ibid, 
let us place a beam upon His bread* (and if the Lord reckon 
r.iee worthy, thou shalt hereafter know, that His body ac 
cording to the Gospel bore the figure of bread ;) Come now, r ^ t9 
and let us place a beam upon His bread, and destroy Him *f ff" 
out of the land of the living ; (Life admits not of destruction, 
why labour ye for nought ?) And His name shall be remem- 
i bered no more. Vain is your counsel ; for before the sun His p s . 72, 
Xame abideth in the Church. And because it was Life, which Se P t * 
hung on the Cross, Moses says, weeping, And thy Life shall p^t- 
hang before thine eyes ; and thou shalt be afraid day and^ept. 
night, and thou shalt not trust thy life. And so too, what 
was just now taken as the text, Lord, who hath believed our 
report ? 

20. This was wrought in figure by Moses, when he crucified 
the serpent, that whoso had been bitten by the living serpent, 
and looked to the brazen serpent, might be saved by believing. 
Does then the brazen serpent save when crucified, and shall not 
the Son of God incarnate save when crucified also ? Through 
out, life comes by means of wood. In the time of Noe the 
preservation of life was by an ark of wood. In the time of 
Moses the sea, beholding the emblematical rod, shrunk from 
him who smote it; is then Moses rod mighty, and is the 
Cross of the Saviour powerless? I pass by the greater part (11.) 
of the types, to keep within compass. The wood in Moses 
case sweetened the water ; and from the side of Jesus the 
water flowed upon the wood. 

21. The beginning of signs under Moses was blood and 
water ; and the last of all Jesus signs was the same. Moses 
begat by changing the river into blood ; and Jesus at the 

| end gave forth from His side water with blood. This was 
perhaps on account of the two speeches, his who judged Him, 
and theirs who cried out against Him ; or because of the 

This interpretation is acknowledged 3.) Theodoret (in loc.) &c. and in the 
hyTertullian,(in Jud.10. inMarc. iii.19. Breviaries, 
iv. 40.) S. Ambrose (in Psalm 35. praef. 



154 Glory qf the Cross anitininricfttad to its Sign. 

LECT. believers and the unbelievers. For Pilate said, / am innocent, 

- and washed his hands in water; they who cried out against Him 

said, His blood be upon us : there came therefore these two out 

of His side ; the water perhaps, for him who judged Him ; but 

for them that shouted against Him, the blood. And again it j 

is to be understood in another way. The blood was for the 

Jews ; the water for the Christians : for upon them as 

conspirators is the sentence of condemnation by the blood; 

but to thee who now bclievest, the salvation which is by 

water. For nothing happened without a meaning. Our 

fathers who have written comments have given another reason 

iv Ey*&lt;y&gt; of this matter. For since in the Gospel the power of salutary 

v/d .sup r. Baptism is twofold, that namely bestowed by means of water 

Cat. iv, on the illuminated, and that to holy martyrs in persecutions 

through their own blood, there came out of that salutary Side 

blood and water, to ratify the gift to confession made for 

Christ, whether in illumination, or on occasions of martyrdom. 

Qvriff- There is something besides meant by the Side. The woman, 

baptism. w ^ was f rrne d from the side, led the way to sin ; but Jesus 

who came to bestow the grace of pardon on men and women 

alike, was pierced in the side for women, that He might undo 

the sin. 

22. And whoever will enquire, will find other reasons also; 
but what has been said is enough, because the time is limited, 
and my hearers may be tired. And yet one never can weary 
of hearing concerning our crowned Lord, and least of all in 
this most holy Golgotha. For while others only hear, we 
have sight and touch too. Let none be weary ; take thine 
armour against the adversaries in the cause of the Cross 
itself; set up the faith of the Cross, as a trophy against the 
gainsayers. For when thou art going to dispute with un 
believers concerning the Cross of Christ, first make with thy 
hand the Sign of Christ s Cross, and the gainsayer will 
be dumb. Be not ashamed to confess the Cross ; for Angels 
Mat. 28, glory in it, saying, We know whom ye seek, Jesus the 
5&lt; Crucified. Canst thou not say, O Angel, " I know whom ye 
seek, my Master ?" No, but he says with boldness, " 1 know 
the Crucified." For the Cross is a crown, not a dishonour. 
(12.) 23. Now let us return to the proofs out of the Prophets 
which I spoke of. The Lord was crucified ; thou hast 



nf event* altewliny the Vnn-ijlj-inn. 155 

received the testimonies. Thou seest this spot of Golgotha! 
Thou answcrest with a shout of praise, as if assenting. Look 
to it lost thou recant it in time of persecution. Rejoice not 
in the Cross in time of peace only, but hold fast the same 
faith in time of persecution also ; not being a friend of Jesus 
in time of peace, and His foe in time of wars. Thou receivest 
now the forgiveness of thy sins, and the gifts of the King s 
spiritual bounty ; when war shall come, strive thou with high 
heart for thy King. Jesus, the Sinless, for thee was crucified ; 
and wilt not thou be crucified for Him who was crucified for 
thee ? Thou art not bestowing a favour, for thou hast first 
received ; but thou art returning a favour, repaying thy debt 
to Him who in Golgotha was crucified for thee. Now 
Igotha is interpreted, " the place of a skull." Who were 
they then, who prophetically named this Golgotha, in which 
Christ the true Head endured the Cross ? As the Apostle 
s;iys, Who is the Image of the Invisible God; and after acol. 1, 
little, and He is the Head of the body, the Church. And 15&lt; 
again, The Head of every man is Christ; and again, Who is \ ov \\ 
the Head of all principality and power. The Head suffered 3. 
in " the place of the skull." O wondrous prophetic adap-Jl o1 * 2 
tation ! The very name almost reminds thee, saying, " Think 
not of the Crucified as of a mere man ; He is the Head of all ^x 

* A * 

principality and power. That Head which was crucified is " e * 
the Head of all power, and has for His Head the Father; 
for the Head of the man is Christ, and the Head of Christ is i Cor. 
God." * l1 3 - 

2L Christ then was crucified for us, having been judged 
in the night, when it was cold, and a fire of coals was laid. John 18, 
He was crucified at the third hour; and from the sixth hour 18 
tli- re was darkness until the ninth hour; but from the ninth 
hour there was light again. Are these things then written ? 

us enquire. Now the Prophet Zacharias says, And iYZech.14, 

be in that day, that there shall not be light, and ftatgepti 
ahull (&gt;&lt;&gt; rol&lt;( 1 1 m I frost one day; (it was cold, wherefore Peter 
warmed himself;) And that day shall be known unto the 
Lorif ; (what, knew He not the other days? days are many, 
but this is the day of the Lord s patience, which the LordPs. us, 
A ;) And that d&lt;iy shall be faioirn unto the Lord, not 

tn&gt;rl in,f virjht : what is this dark saying which the 



156 Prophecy of the (lurk-ness. 

LECT. Prophet speaks ? That day is neither day nor night ? what 
- then shall we name it ? The Gospel interprets it, by relating 
the event. It was not day ; for the sun shone not uniformly 
from his rising to his setting, but from the sixth hour till the 
ninth hour, there was darkness at mid-day. The darkness 
therefore was in the interval ; but God called the darkness 
night. Wherefore it was neither day nor night: for neither 
was it all light, that it should be day ; nor was it all dark 
ness, that it should be called night ; but after the ninth hour 
the sun shone forth. This also the Prophet foretels ; for 
after saying, Not day, nor night, he added, And at evening 
time it shall be light 6 . Seest thou the exactness of the 
prophets ? Seest thou the truth of the things foretold? 

25. But seekest thou at what hour exactly the sun was 
darkened ? w r as it the fifth hour, or the eighth, or the tenth ? 
Tell, O Prophet, the certainty thereof to the indocile Jews ; 
when shall the sun go down ? The Prophet Amos answers, 

Amos 8, And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord God, 
that I will cause the sun to go down at noon ; (for there was 
darkness from the sixth hour ;) and I will darken the earth 
in the clear day. What sort of season is this, O Prophet, and 

v. 10. what sort of day ? And I will turn your feasts into mourning ; 
for this was done in the days of unleavened bread, and at the 

v. 10. feast of the Passover: then afterwards he says. And I will 
make Him as the mourning of an Only Son, and those ivith 
Him as a day of anguish ; for in the day of unleavened bread, 
and at the feast, their women mourned and wept, and the 
Apostles who had hidden themselves were in anguish. Won 
derful then is this prophecy. 

(13.) 26. But, some one will say, " Give me yet another sign; 
what other plain sign is there in the matter?" Jesus was 
crucified ; and He had but one coat, and one cloak : now his 
cloak the soldiers shared among themselves, having rent it 
into four ; but His coat was not rent, for when rent it would 
have been no longer of any use ; so about this lots were cast 
by the soldiers : thus the one they divide, but for the other 
they cast lots. Is then this also written ? They know, the 
diligent chanters of the Church, who imitate the Angel hosts, 

e Theodoret (in loc.) gives the same plains it of the second advent, 
interpretation, S. Jerome (in loc.) ex- 



of Christ s jjass-iott. 157 

and continually sing praises to God : who are thought worthy Ps. 22, 
to chant Psalms in this Golgotha, and to say, They parted My Jo h n 19 
iniiiK-nl tiutong them, and for My vesture they did cast lots/ 2 
The word " lots" expresses the very act of the soldiers. j v / 



27. Again, when He had been judged before Pilate, 
g clothed in red ; for there they put on Him a purple robe. 

Is this also written? Esaias saith, Who is this that comethls.63,1. 

from Edom ? the redness of His garments is from Bosor ; k 
10 is this who for a dishonour weareth purple ? for Bosor 

hath in Hebrew this meaning f .) Why are Thy garments red, v. 2. 

find Thy raiment as from the trodden winepress? But He is. 65, 2. 

answers and says, All day long have I stretched forth Mine ept * 

hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people* . 

28. He stretched out His hands on the Cross, that He 
might encompass the ends of the world ; for this Golgotha is 
the very centre of the earth. It is not iny word, but it is a 

prophet who hath said, Thou hast wrought salvation in thePs.74, 

i 9 
middle of the earth. He stretched forth human hands, who 

by His spiritual hands had established the heaven ; and they 
were fastened with nails, that His manhood which bore the 
sins of men, having been nailed to the tree, and having died, 

might die with it, and we might rise again in righteous- Rom. 5, 
less. For since by one man came death, by One Man also 
?ame life ; by One Man, the Saviour, dying of His own * 
accord: for remember what He said, / have power to toy John 10, 
iou n My life, and I have power to take it again. 8 * 

29. So He endured these things, having come for the (14.) 
alvation of all ; but the people returned Him an evil recorn- 
ense. Jesus says, / thirst, He who had brought forth the 
aters for them out of the flinty rock ; and He asks fruit of the 

ine which He had planted. But what does the Vine ? This 
ine, by nature indeed of the holy fathers, but of Sodom by pur- xa.ro. 
.oose of heart ; (for their Vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of *" ** 

field* nf Gomorrah;) this Vine, when the Lord was athirst, Dcut. 
laving filled a sponge and put it on a reed, offers Him vinegar. 32 33&lt; 
Tlu&gt;y &lt;j&lt;ice Me also y all for My meat, and in My thirst, they p s . 69, 

21. 

f P. Jeromo says it means flrsh (caro) g This passage is interpreted of the 
iMf/i.y^v-.v.v(intribulatione.) Ep. 61. ad Crucifixion by Origen, Jerome, Theo- 
ammach. vol. ii. p. 120. ed. 1684. It is doret, (all in loc.) &c. &c. not of course 
ow considered to mean a. fold for cattle, excluding its primary reference to God s 
in Mic.2,12,from.lXl secuit, munivit. fatherly all-embracing love. 



15* The pendent thief 

LECT. 0,1 L-e Me inneaar In drink. Thou seest the plainness of the 
XIII 

Prophet s description. But what sort of gall put they intc 



Mark My mouth ? They gave Him, it says, trine mingled witt, 
myrrh. Now myrrh is of the taste of gall, and exceeding 
bitter. Are these things what ye recompense unto the Lord : 
Offerest thou these things, O Vine, unto thy Master ? Rightly 
Is. 5,1. did the Prophet Esaias aforetime bewail you, saying, Mij 
well-beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill ; and (not 
v. 2. to recite the whole) he goes on, I waited that it should hrimj 
?ept * forth grapes ; I thirsted that it should give wine ; but it 
brought forth thorns ; for thou seest the crown, wherewith I 
v - 6 - am adorned. What then shall I now decree ? / will com- 
mand the clouds that they rai,&gt; no rain upon it. For the ! 
prophets, the clouds, were removed from them, and are for 
l Cor. the future in the Church ; as Paul says, Let the prophets speak\ 
l 4 , 2 ^ tico or three, and let the others judge ; and again, God tj 
11. in the Church, some, Apostles, and some, Prophets. AgabuiJ 

who bound his own feet and hands, was a prophet. 
(15.) 30. And concerning the robbers who were crucified with 
Is. 53, Him, it was written, And He was numbered with the trans- 
12 - gressors. Both of them had been transgressors, but one w 
so no longer. For the one was a transgressor to the end, 
stubborn against salvation ; whose hands indeed were fastened, 
but who through his blasphemies smote with his tongue. 
When the Jews passing by wagged their heads, mocking the 
Ps. 109, Crucified, and fulfilling what was written, When they lookedi 
on Me, they shaked their heads, he also reviled with them. 
Luke23, But the other rebuked the rcviler ; and to him the end of life 

A f\ 

was the beginning of restoration ; the surrender of his soul 
was a preventing others in salvation. And after rebuking 
him, he says, Lord, remember me ; for to Thee is my 
speech. Leave this man, for the eyes of his understanding 
are blinded ; but remember me. I say not, remember my 
works, for of these I am afraid. Every man has a feeling 
for his fellow-traveller; I am travelling with thee death wards; 
remember me, Thy fellow-wayfarer. I say not, Remember me 
now, but, when Thou comes t nto Thy kingdom. 

31. What power, O robber, enlightened thee ? Who taught 
thee to worship that despised Man, thy companion on the 
Cross ? O Eternal Light, which givest light to them that are 



u-trs saved by faith without work*. 151) 

in darkness ! Therefore also he rightly heard the words, Be 
,,f tjtuiil cheer ; not that thy deeds are such as should make 
tlur l&gt;e of good cheer ; but that the King is here, dispensing 
favours. The request reached unto a distant time; but the 
grace is very speedy. Verily I say unto thee, This day shall 

*r\ 

ihnit be with Me in Paradise ; because to-day thou hast Ps * 95 

he" ril My voice, and hast not hardened thine heart. Very 7. 8. 

speedily I passed sentence upon Adam, very speedily I par 

don thee. To him it was said, In the day wherein thou Gen. 2, 

putcst, thou shalt surely die ; but thou to-day hast obeyed the 

faith, to-day is thy salvation. Adam by the Tree fell ; thou 

by the Tree art brought to Paradise. Fear not the serpent ; 

he shall not cast thee out; for he is fallen from heaven. And Luke 10, 

I say not unto thee, This day shalt thou depart, but, This day 

slialt thou be with Me. Be of good courage ; thou shalt not 

be cast out. Fear not the fiery sword ; it shrinks from its vid.Am- 

** K " 

Lord. O mighty and ineffable grace ! The faithful Abraham p s 118 

had not yet entered, but the robber enters ! Moses and the s - 20 - n - 

12. 
Prophets had not yet entered, and the lawless robber enters. 

Paul also wondered at this before thee, saying, Where sin Rom. 5, 
abounded, there grace did much more abound. They who 20 
had borne the heat of the day had not yet entered ; and he v. Mat. 
of the eleventh hour entered. Let none murmur against the &c 
goodman of the house, for he says, Friend, I do thee no wrong ; 
is it not lawful for Me to do what I will with Mine own. 
The robber has a wish to work righteousness, but death pre 
vents him ; I wait not exclusively for work, I have accepted 
faith. I am come who feed My sheep among the lilies, I am Cant. 6, 
come to feed My sheep in the gardens. I have found a sheep, 



1 ^ 

a lost one, but I lay it on My shoulders, for he believes, 5. 5. 
since he himself has said, / have gone astray like a lostp s . 119 
sheep : Lord, remember me when Thou comest in Thy 176&lt; 
kingdom. 

32. Of this garden I sang of old to My spouse in the (16.) 
Canticles, and spake thus to her. lam come into My garden, Cant. 5, 
My sister, My spouse; (now the place where He was crucified * 
was a garden ;) and what takest Thou thence ? / have ibid. 
gathered My myrrh ; having drunk wine mingled with myrrh, 
and vinegar. And having received these, He said, It is John 19, 
finished. For the mystery has been fulfilled; the things that 30 * 



H&gt;0 Christ tied &lt;&gt;H the (Wyy instead of us sinners. 

LECT. are written have been fulfilled; sins are forgiven. For Chris 
9 being mine n High-priest qf good things to come, by agree te 




11 .&c. and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is t( 
say, not of this building, neither by the blood &lt;&gt;f goats am 
calves, but by His own blood, He entered in onre into the hoh 
place, having obtains! dental redemption for us ; for if tin 
blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer, s/trin- 
kling the unclean, x ui&lt;-tijie(/i to the purifying nf the flesh, 



Heb. \Q,much more the blood of Christ / And again, Having there 
fore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the 



Jesus, by a new and living /% which He hath consccfata 
for us, through the veil, that is to say, His flesh. And 
because His flesh, this veil, was dishonoured, the embleinati- 

Mat.27,cal veil of the temple was rent through, as it is written, Ami 
behold, the veil of the temple u:as rent in lira in from th&lt; 
top to the bottom; for not a morsel of it was left ; for sin 

Mat. 23, the Mast IT said, Behold, your house is left unto you desolnt- 
the house has been rent into pieces. 

v. Col. l , 33. These things the Saviour endured, making peace through 
the Blood of His Cross, for things in heaven, and things in 
earth. For we were enemies of God through sin, and God 
had appointed the sinner to die. There must needs therefore 
have happened one of two things -, either that God, keeping 
Plis words, should destroy all men, or that in His loving- 
kindness, He should cancel the sentence. But behold the 
wisdom of God ; He preserved both to His sentence its truth, 
and to His loving-kindness its exercise. Christ took our sins 



l Pet. 2, i n jji s ooc iy on i] ie f re0y (fat we being dead to sin, should / 

to righteousness. Of no small account was He who died for 



, us ; He was not a literal sheep ; He was not a mere man ; 
jj e was more than an Angel ; He was God made man. 
The transgression of sinners was not so great, as the righte 
ousness of Him who died for them ; we have not committed 
as much sin as He has wrought righteousness who laid down 
His life for us, who laid it down when He pleased, and took it 
again when He pleased. And wouldest thou have proof that 
He laid down His life not by violence, nor against His will 

Luke23, yielded up the ghost ? He cried to the Father, saying, Father, 
into Thy hands I commend My spirit ; I commend it, that I 

Aiat.27, ma y tak e ^ again. And having said these things, He gave j 



Prophecy of tin* loath. KJ1 

//&gt; the gliost ; but not for any long time, for He rose again 
from the dead speedily. 

34. The Sun was darkened, because of the Sun of righteous- (17.) 
ncfix. The rocks were rent, because of the spiritual Rock. Mal - 4 
The tombs were opened, and the dead arose, because of Him 9C tirfo. 
who wa.sfree among the dead; He sent forth His prisoners Ps. 88, 
out of the pit wherein is no water. Be not then ashamed of the ^ ch 9 
Crucified, but be thyself bold to say. He beareth our sins, and n. 
(irricth our sorrows, and with His stripes we are healed. 4/5 
Let us not be unthankful to our Benefactor. And again ; 

for the transgression of my people was He stricken; and He ver. 8. 9. 
made His grave with the tricked, and with the rich in His 
death. Therefore Paul says plainly, that Christ died for our 1 Cor. 
tins according to the Scriptures, and that He rose again the 
third day according to the Scriptures. 

35. But we seek to be told plainly where He has been 
buried. Is His tomb then made with hands ? Is it, like the 
tombs of kings, raised above the ground? Is the Sepulchre 
made of stones joined together? And what is laid upon it? 
Tell us, O Prophets, the exact truth concerning His tomb 
also, where it is placed, and where we shall seek it ? And 
they say, Look unto the solid rock which ye hare hewn. Is. 51, 
Look and behold. Thou hast in the Gospel, In a sepulchre ^ t ^ 1 

hewn in stone, which iras hewn out of a rock. And whaty*, 

^ 

happens next ? What kind of door has the sepulchre ? 



Again another Prophet says, They cut off My life in the ?* 
dungeon, and cast a stone upon Me. I, who am the Chief L 
corner-stone, elect, precious, lie for a little time within 
stone. I who am a stone of stumbling to the Jews, but of 46. 
salvation to them who believe. The Tree of Life, therefore, 



planted in the earth, that the earth which had been * 
cursed might enjoy the blessing, and that the dead might beo ^ 
released. 

36. Let us not then be ashamed to confess the Crucified. (18.) 
Be the Cross our seal made with boldness by our fingers on vid. 

T 1 til 

our brow, and in every thing ; over the bread we eat, and the de Cor 
cups we drink ; in our comings in, and goings out ; before 
our sleep, when we lie down and when we awake ; when we 
are in the way, and when we are still. Great is that pre 
servative ; it is without price, for the poor s sake ; without 

M 



Hr2 The doctrine of the Cfnss the foundation. 

LECT. toil, for the sick ; since also its grace is from God. It is the 

"Y TT T 

Sign of the faithful, and the dread of devils: for He has 
Col. 2, triumphed over them in //, having made a show of them 

openly; for when they see the Cross, they are reminded 
Ps. 74, of the Crucified; they are afraid of Him, who hath bruised 

13 

the heads of the drayon. Despise not the Seal, because 

of the freeness of the gift; but for this the rather honour thy 
Benefactor. 

37. And if thou art ever led into disputation, and hast not 
the grounds of proof, yet let Faith remain firm in thee ; or 
rather, become thou well learned, and then silence the Jews out 
of the prophets, and the Greeks out of their own fables. 
They themselves worship men thunderstricken h : but the 
thunder when it comes from heaven, comes not at random. 
If they are not ashamed to worship men thunderstricken and 
abhorred of God, art thou ashamed to worship the beloved 
Son of God, who was crucified for thee ? I am ashamed to 
speak about their so-called Gods, and I leave them because 
of time ; let those who know, speak. And let all heretics 
also be silenced. If any say that the Cross is an illusion, 
turn away from him. Abhor those who say that Christ was 
crucified to our fancy only ; for if so, and if salvation is from 
the Cross, then is salvation a fancy also. If the Cross is 

i Cor. 15, fancy, the Resurrection is fancy also; but if Christ be not 

17 * 

risen, we are yet in our sins. If the Cross is fancy, the 
Ascension also is fancy ; and if the Ascension is fancy, then 
is the second coming also fancy, and every thing is hence- 
avwro- forth unsubstantial. 

38. Take therefore first, as an unassailable foundation, 
the Cross, and build upon it the rest of the faith. Deny 
not the Crucified ; for, if thou deny Him, thou hast many 
to arraign thee. Judas the traitor will arraign thee first; 
for he who betrayed Him, knew that He was condemned 
to death by the chief-priests and elders. The thirty pieces 
of silver bear witness ; Gethsemane bears witness, where the 
betrayal happened ; I speak not yet of the Mount of Olives, 
on which they were that night, praying. The moon in 
the night bears witness; the day bears witness, and the 
darkened sun ; for it endured not to look on the crime of the 

h ^sculapius. 



ffra.ro. 



Witnesses of the Crucifixion. 168 

conspirators. The fire remonstrates with thee, by which 
Peter stood and warmed himself; if thou deny the Cross, 
the eternal fire awaits thee. I say what is severe, that thou 
may not have experience of it. Remember the swords 
that came against Him in Gethsemane, that thou be not 
punished by the eternal sword. The house of Caiaphas will 
arraign thee, shewing by its present desolation the power of 
Him who was erewhile judged there. Yea, Caiaphas himself 
will rise up against thee in the day of judgment ; the very 
servant will rise up against thee, who smote Jesus with the 
palm of his hand ; they also who bound Him, and they who 
led Him away. Even Herod shall rise up against thee ; and 
Pilate ; as if saying, Why deniest thou Him who was 
slandered unto us by the Jews, whom we knew to have done 
no wrong ? For I Pilate then washed my hands. The false 
witnesses shall rise up against thee, and the soldiers who put 
on Him the purple robe, and set on Him the crown of 
thorns, and crucified Him in Golgotha, and cast lots for His 
coat. Simon the Cyrenian will cry out upon thee, who bore 
the Cross behind Jesus. 

89. There will cry out upon thee, among the stars, the 
darkened Sun; among the things upon earth, the Wine 
mingled with myrrh ; among reeds, the Reed ; among herbs, 
the I lyssop ; among the things of the sea, the Sponge ; among 
tn-es, the Wood of the Cross; the soldiers, too, as was said, 
who nailed Him, and cast lots for His vesture; the soldier 
who pierced Ilis side with the spear; the women who then 
were present; the veil of the temple then rent asunder; the 
hall of Pilate, now laid waste by the power of Him who was 
then crucified; this holy Golgotha, rising on high, and shew 
ing itself to this day, and displaying even yet how because of 
( hrist the rocks were then riven 1 ; the neighbouring sepulchre 
where He was laid; and the stone which was laid on the 
dnor, which lies to this day by the tomb k ; the Angels who 
were then present; the women who worshipped Him after 
His resurrection; Peter and John, who ran to the sepulchre; 
and Thomas, who thrust his hand into His side, and his 
fingers into the print of the nails. For it was for our sakes 

The martyr Lucian (\\\\. KutV. Hist. k Vide also Jerome, Ep. 27. ed. 
in-. KJS1. 

M 2 



KM The Poii &lt;T nf llw Cross. 

LECT. that he so carefully handled Him ; for what thou who wert 
XIII 
- not there present, wouldest have sought, he being present, by 

JK0CT i X tf * 

loft iav. God s Providence, did seek. 

40. Thou hast Twelve Apostles, witnesses of the Cross; 
and the whole earth, and the world of men who believe 
on Him who was upon it. Let thy very presence here now 
persuade thee of the power of the Crucified. For who has 
now brought thee to, this assembly? what soldiers? With 
what bonds hast thou been forced ? What doom has driven 
thee here now ? No, but the salutary Trophy of Jesus, the 
Cross, has brought you all together. This has enslaved the 
Persians, and tamed the Scythians ; this, to the Egyptians, 
has given, for cats and dogs and their manifold errors, the 
knowledge of God ; this, to this day heals diseases ; this&gt; to 
this day drives away devils, and overthrows the juggleries of 
drugs and charms. 

41. This shall appear again with Jesus from heaven 1 ; for 
Zech.l2, the trophy shall precede the king: that seeing Him whom 

they pierced, and by the Cross knowing Him who was dis 
honoured, the Jews may repent and mourn ; (but they shall 
ver. 12 mmtr)1 tribe by tribe, when their season for repentance shall 
Sept. be no more ;) and that we may glory, boasting of the Cross, 
worshipping the Lord who was sent, and crucified for us, and 
worshipping also God His Father who sent Him, with the 
Holy Ghost: To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

1 It is the common opinion of the Man in heaven" will be the Cross, vid. 
Fathers, that a the sign of the Son of Chrysostom and Jerome in Mat.xxiv.30. 



LECTURE XIV. 



ON THE RESURRECTION, ASCENSION, AND EXALTATION 

OF CHRIST. 



1 COR. xv. 1 4. 

Moreover, brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel ichich I 
preached unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein 
ye stand; by which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory 
what I preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain. 
For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also 
received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the 
Scriptures ; and that He was buried, and that He rose 
again the third day according to the Scriptures. 

1. BE glad, O Jerusalem, and hold festival together, all yev.is.66, 
ifhu lore Jesus; for He is risen; rejoice all ye who before 1 ^* 
unturned, hearing the reckless deeds and enormities of the 
Jews. For He who was entreated of them with insult here, 
is risen again ; and as the Lecture on the Cross was one 
of pain, so now let the good tidings of the Resurrection 
gladden all present. Let mourning be turned into gladness, 
and lamentation into joy; and let our mouth be filled with 
joy and gladness, because of Him who after His resurrection 
said, Rejoice. For I know the sorrow of the lovers of Christ v. Mat. 
during the days past; since, our words having ended at His 28 9 * 
Death and Burial, and not having told the good tidings of the 
Resurrection, their mind was kept in suspense to hear what 
they longed for. Now therefore the Dead is risen, He who 
\\^^/ree awottij the dead, and the deliverer of the dead. He, Ps.88,5. 
whose head, by reason of His patience, was bound in scorn 
with the crown of thorns, has now, being risen, put on the 
diadem of His victory over death. 



l(j(&gt; Prophecies (/ the Resurrection. 

LECT. v&gt;. As then we have set before you the witnesses of His 

Cross, in like manner let us now ascertain the proofs of the 

XK.ZUI. Resurrection ; since the Apostle in the text says, He was 
1 Cor. 15, buried, and rose the third day according to the Scriptures* 

A 

Since therefore an Apostle sends us to Scripture testimonies, it 
is proper for us to recognize there the hope of our salvation; and 
to learn, first, whether the Divine Scriptures tell us the time of 
the Resurrection, whether it is in summer, or in autumn, or 
after winter; and from what sort of place the Saviour arises ;- 
and what the name of the place is called in the wondrous 
prophets ; and whether women, who had sought Him and 
found Him not, afterwards found Him and rejoiced: that 
when the Gospels are read, the narratives of these holy 
works may not be thought fables or legends. 

(2.) 3. Now that Christ was buried, ye have heard plainly in 

Is.67,2. the foregoing discourse ; since Esaias says,///.? burial sh&lt;dl 

&gt;ept be in peace: for in His burial He made peace in heaven and 

Is. 57,1. earth, bringing sinners unto God. And, the just is taken 

Sept&lt; aic&lt;t y from the face of unrighteousness, and, His burial shall 

Sept. be in peace, and, / will give the wicked for His burial. And 

Gen. 49, the prophecy of Jacob in the Scriptures, saying, He couched 

and lay down as a lion, and as a lion s whelp; who shall 

Numb, a waken Him? And in like manner in Numbers, He couched, 

24 0. 

He lay down as a lion, and as a great lion. And ye have 
Ps. 22, heard oftlimes the Psalm which says, And Thou hast brought 
Me into the dust of death. Also, we specified the spot, when 
Ii.5i,i.we quoted the words, Look unto the rock which ye hare heirn. 
Now therefore let the texts for the Resurrection itself follow. 
P.12,5. 4. He says therefore in the eleventh Psalm, For the op 
pression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I 
arise, saith the Lord. But with some persons this passage is 
uncertain ; for He often arises to wrath also, that He may 
take vengeance on His enemies. Come then to the fifteenth 
Ps. 16,1, Psalm, which says plainly, Preserve me, O God, for in Thee 
Sept&gt; do I put my trust; and after this, Their drink offerings of 
, s t blood will I not offer, nor take up their names into my lips, 
since they have refused Me, and named Caesar as their king ; 
Ib. v. 8. and afterwards, I have set the Lord always before Me; because 
He is at My right hand, I shall not be morcd; and after a little, 
Ib. v. 7. My reins also instruct Me in the night-season; and after this 



Of its time and place. 167 

it .savs most plainly, For Thou wilt not leave My soul in hell, Ib.v. 10. 
neither iri/t Thou suffer Thine Holy One to see corruption. 
lit; has not said, neither wilt Thou suffer Thine Holy One to 
see death, else He had not died ; but corruption, says He, 
I shall not see, and 1 shall not abide in death. Thou wiltl^.\\. 
shew Me the path of life. Behold, here is plainly preached 
life alter death. Turn next to the twenty -ninth Psalm, / will p s .3o,i. 
extol Thee, O Lord, for Thou hast lifted Me up, and hast not**?* 
made My foes to rejoice over Me : what came to pass ? wert 
Thou rescued from Thine enemies, or wert Thou set free when 
about to be smitten? He Himself says most plainly, Thou,ib.v.3. 
Lord, hast brought My soul out of hell. In the former place v er r s . a nd 
He says, Thou wilt not leave, speaking prophetically; and Sept.) 
here lie speaks of what is to happen, as if it had already 
happened, Thou hast brought ; Thou hast kept My life from ibid. 
them //tat go down to the pit. At what time shall this be ? (3.) 
Weeping shall endure for the evening ; but joy comcth inib. v. 5. 
the morning; for in the evening was the mourning of the K 
disciples, and in the morning, the gladness of the Resur 
rection. 

5. And wouldest Ihou know the place also ? He says 
,ain in the Canticles, I went down into the garden of nuts, cant.6, 
For though it be now adorned and that most excellently with ] 
royal gifts, yet it was before a garden, and the tokens and 9. and 
traces thereof remain. A garden inclosed was it ; a fountain 14 - 
&lt; d by the Jews, who said, We remember that that 12. 
&lt;!&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;( r&lt;&gt;r will while He was yet alive, after three days I will Mat. 27, 
/ Y.SY. ngnin ; command therefore that the sepulchre be made 
sure; and afterwards, They went and made the *epulckfe* G6. 
*&gt;/ , sealing the stone, and setting a watch. To whom, 
referring, there is one who said well, And in rest wilt Thou Job 7, 
judge them. But who is the fountain sealed, or who i s I8&gt;Sept 
interpreted as the ire 1 1 of living waters / It is the Saviour, 15. 
concerning whom it is written, With Thee is the fountain $35,9. 
!/ life. 

(&gt;. But what saith Zephaniah to the disciples in the person 
of Christ? r re/ fire Thyself, rise up early, nil their small Zeph. 3, 
&lt;-l uister* are destroyed ; that is, of the Jews, with whom there 7 Sept 
a iv U-it no o-rapos &lt;&gt;{ salvation, no not even a stray cluster; 
tn- their vine is cut down. See how he says to the disciples, 



16*8 Of its tune and pl 



LECT. Prepare thyself ] rise up early ; at early dawn expect the 
Resurrection. And afterwards in the same connection, he 



lb. v. 8. says, Therefore await Me, .with the Lord, on the day of My 
resurrection at the Testimony. Seest thou that the Prophet 
foresaw even that the place of the Resurrection should be 
called, the Testimony ? For wherefore is this place of Gol- 
" &tha and of the Resurrection not called like the other 
churches, a church, but a Testimony : It was perhaps 
because of the PropTiet, who had said, On the day of nty 



Resurrection, at the 

7. And who then is this, and what is the sign of Him who 
rises again ? It is said plainly in what follows, in the same 

Zeph. 3, passage of the Prophet, For then I will turn to the people a 
language; (since, after the Resurrection, the Holy Ghost 
being sent, the grace of tongues was given ;) to serve the Lord 
u-ith one consent. And what other pledge is there in the 
same Prophet of their serving the Lord with one consent ? 

Ib.v.io. From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, they shall bring to Me 
sacrifices. Thou knowest what is written in the Acts, that 
an Ethiopian Eunuch came from beyond the rivers of Ethi 
opia. When therefore the Scriptures tell both the time and 
the peculiar character of the place, and also the signs fol 
lowing the Resurrection, be thou assured henceforth of the 
Resurrection, and let no one shake thee from confessing that 
Christ is raised from the dead. 

(4.) 8. Now receive yet another testimony in the eighty- 
seventh Psalm, where Christ speaks by the Prophets ; (for He 

Ts 88,1. who then spoke, afterwards came to us,) O Lord God of My 
Mthntion, I hare cried day and ni(jht before Thee; and after 

v. 4. 5. a little, / am as a Man that hath no strength, free among the 
dead. He said not, " I am a man without strength," but " as a 
Man without strength," for He was crucified, not from want 
of strength, but willingly ; and His death was not without power 
or will. I am counted with them that go down into the pit. 

v . 8. And what is the Sign ? Thou hast put away Mine acquaint- 

v. 10. ance far from Me; (for the disciples fled ;) wilt Thou shew 

v. 13. ironders to the dead? Then after a little, But unto Thee 
have I cried, O Lord, and in the morning shall My prayer 
prevent Tlwe. Seest thou how they declare the very time 
both of the Passion and of the Resurrection r 



The Holy M j.n(/&lt; /i/ f near the city intll. 1(&gt;!) 

9. And whence did the Saviour arise ? He says in the 

of Songs, Rise up, My love, and come away : and after- Cant. 2, 
wards, ///- the cleft of the rock ; for the cleft of the rock He 10 
tails the cleft which was then at the door of the salutary 
sepulchre, and was hewn out of the rock itself, as it is 
customary here in the front of sepulchres. For now it appears 
not, the outer cave having been hewn away for the sake of 
the present adornment; for before the sepulchre was de 
corated by royal zeal, there was a cave in the face of the 
rock. But where is the rock which has in it this cleft? 
lies it in the midst of the city, or near the w^alls and the 
outskirts? and is it in the ancient walls, or in the outer walls 
which were built afterwards ? He says then in the Canticles, 
In the cleft of the rock, near to the outer wall*. Cant. 2, 

14. Sept. 

a A writer of great name, in a review appear, we think, to Dr. C. himself ; from 
of Dr. Clarke s Travels, (who denied the a testimony which will shortly be pro- 
accuracy of the tradition in the text con- duced," [the passage of St. Cyril in the 
cerning the site of the Sepulchre,) thus text.] " It is certain that, whether proba- 
expresses himself. " Nor was it only ble or not, the ancient limits of the city 

-uperior sanctity which would pre- did exclude the present sepulchre ; and 
serve its memory. As the private pro- that this last, defaced and altered as it 
perty of an opulent Christian family, it is, may be really the place where the 
would be secured from pollution or in- Lord lay, is likely from the following 
jury ; and the tomb itself was no here- circumstances. Forty yards, or there 
abouts, which tradition was to settle, abouts, from the upper end of the sepul- 
but an object too visible and too definite chre, the natural rock is visible ; and in 
either to be overlooked or mistaken, the place which the priests call Calvary, 
While a single Christian survived in the it is at least as high as the top of the 
town, it could never cease to be known sepulchre itself. The rock then may 
and vein-rated .... But as Dr. Clarke have extended as far as the present 
ha- shewn that the present appearance entrance, and though the entrance itself 
of the sepulchre is at variance with the is hewn into form and cased with marble, 
account in the Gospel, and the general the adytum yet offers proof that it is not 
character of Jewish tombs; it re- factitious. It is a trapezium of .seven 
mains for us to examine whether the feet by six, neither at right angles to its 
alterations of time, together with those own entrance, nor to the aisle of the 
ascribed to thebadt:isti-. an dun fortunate Church which conducts to it, and in no 
zeal of Helena, cm have been sufficient respect contormable to the external plan 
to produce this difference. His reasons of the tomb. This last is arranged in a 
for incredulity are as follows: the tomb workmanlike manner, with its frontal 
hrist \\a&lt; in a garden without the immediately opposite the principal nave, 
w alls of Jerusalem ; the structure which and in the same style with the rest of 
at present bears its name, is in the heart the Church. It is shaped something 
of, at least, the modern city, and Dr. like a horse shoe, and its walls, measured 

- unwilling to believe that the ancient from this outer horse shoe to the inner 

limits can have been so much circum- trapezium, vary from five to eight feet in 

scribed to the north as to exclude its thickness, a sufficient space to admit of 

. Further, the original sepulchre was no inconsiderable density of rock, be- 
undoubtedly a cave: the present oifers tween the outer and inner coating of 
no such appearance, being an insulated marble. This, however, does not apply 
pile, constructed or cased with distinct to the ante-chamber, of which the frontal 
slabs of marble. That both these argu- at least is probably fictitious : and where 
merits, however, are inconclusive will that indenture in the marble i* found 



1 70 The Resurrection at the same season as the Creation. 

LECT. 10. At what season does the Saviour arise ? Is it the 
\ iv. 

season of summer, or some other ? In that same Song, before 



i %. \ 

vt the above-mentioned place, he says straightway, The winter 

H. is past, the rain is over and gone ; the flowers a^war on the 



* 



earth, and the time of pruning is come. Is not the earth 
now full of flowers, and are they not pruning the vines? 
Sept. Thou seest how he says also, that the winter is now past. 
For in this month Xanthicus, it is now spring ; and this | 
season, which is the -first month among the Hebrews, is that in 
which is the feast of the Passover ; of the figurative Passover 
erewhile, but now of the true. This is the season of the creation 
of the world b : for then God said, Let the earth bring forth 
grass, the herd yielding seed after his kind. And now, as thou 
seest, every herb is producing seed. And as at that time, 
God having made the sun and moon, gave them courses of 
equal length, so also but a few days ago it was the season of 
Gen.l, the Equinox. At that time, God said, Let Us make men hi 
infra llr lcn " . /&lt;? after Our likeness : and the iinaye he re- 
XVH. 12. C eived ; but the likeness, by his transgression, he defaced 6 ; 
at that very season then in which he lost this, did his restora 
tion also come to pass. At the same season in which 
created man was cast out of paradise for his disobedience, 
was believing man brought into it again by obeying. Salva 
tion therefore was at the very season when the fall was ; when 
the flowers appeared^ and the time of pruning was come. 

11. The place of His burial was a garden ; and that which 

v. John \vas planted therein was a Vine ; for He has said, And I am 

the Vine. It was planted then in the earth, that the curse 

which was on it for Adam s sake might be rooted out. The 

which induced Dr. C. to believe that the it pleased the taste of their employer, 

whole thickness of the wall was composed furnished at the same time materials for 

of the same costly substance. Now these her intended Cathedral." Quarterly 

circumstances afford, we apprehend, no Review, March, 1813. 

inconsiderable grounds for supposing, b This belief is expressed also by 

with Pococke, that it is indeed a grotto Ambros. Hexam. i. 4. n. 13. Cosm. 

above ground : the irregularity of the Topogr. v. p. 192. c. 

shape, the difference between the ex- c This distinction is also made by 

ternal and internal plan, the thickness Irenaeus, (Haer. v. 6. and 16.) Ambro- 

of the walls, so needless, if they are siast. (dign. cond. hum. 2 and 3.) Phi- 

throughout of masonry, all favour this lastrius, (Haer. 98.) e. They seem to 

opinion; nor is the task ascribed to consider " image" to have reference to 

Helena s workmen of insulating this our nature, and " likeness" to our holi- 

rock, from that which is still preserved ness. vid. also Bp. Bull s dissertation on 

a few yards distant, at all incredible, the Paradisiacal state of man. 
when we consider that the labour, while 



l*i nj)hecy of our Lord s appearances. 171 

. iirth \vas doomed to thorns and thistles; the true Vine 
sprang out of the earth, that the saying might be fulfilled, 
Truth shell Hiring nut of the earth, and righteousness shall ?*%$, 
Innk down fwm heaven. And what will He say who is 
buried in the garden? / have gathered My myrrh u-ith Myc*m. 5, 
si tiro ; and again, Myrrh and aloes with all the chief spices. g^ 4 
But these are the marks of His burial ; and in the Gospels it H. 
is said. The women came to the sepulchre, bringing the spices Luke24, 
which they had prepared. And there came also Nicodemus, 
and brnwjht a mixture of myrrh and aloes. And afterwards 39. 
ills written, / have eaten My bread with My honey ; the Cant. 5, 
bitter, before His Passion, and the sweet after His Resurrec- L Sept&gt; 
lion. Then, being risen, He entered through the closed John2o, 
doors ; but they believed not in Him, for they thought they 



saw a spirit; but He says, Handle Me and see ; thrust your 36. &c. 
lingers into the prints of the nails, as Thomas required. And 
w/ii n they yet disbelieved for joy, and wondered, He said 
unto them, Have ye here any meat? and they gave Him a 
l&gt;\t&gt;r&lt;&gt; of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. Thou seest how 

3 fulfilled that Scripture, / have eaten my bread icith my 
honey. 

12. But before He entered in through the closed doors, the (6.) 
Bridegroom and the Physician of Souls was sought by those 
most noble and courageous women. Those blessed women 
came to the sepulchre, and sought Him who was risen, and 
the tears still flowed from their eyes ; though it was time 
rather to be glad, and to dance for Him who was risen. 
Mary according to the Gospel came seeking Him, and found 
Him not; and after this, she heard from the Angels, and 
ut last s;uv Christ. Are these things also written? Yes; he 

s in the Song of Songs, On my bed I sought Him wkomC&nt.s, 
my vnil Inwlh ; at what time ? By night on iny bed I sought 
linn whom nnj soul loi eth; (Mary, it is said, came while itJohn20, 
was yet dark ;) On my bed I sought Him by night; I sought 1 
//////, but I found Him not. And in the Gospel Mary says, 
They haw taken im-mj ///// Lord, and I know not where thei 
fnir&lt;&gt; /,//,/ Him. But the Angels who were there present 13 
relieve her ignorance, saying, Why seek ye the Living fnnong 
th&lt;&gt; dead? He is not only risen, but is risen and the 
dead with Him. But she kneu not this, and in her person 



17-2 f onduct (if the women. 

LECT. the Song of Songs said to the Angels, Saw ye Him ivhon 

"V" TV 

-1 my void loveth * It was but a little that I passed from them 
3. 4. i*/ (that is, the two Angels,) when I found Him whom nn 
oS, Sept. S0 ui loveth, I held Him, and would not let Him go. 

13. For after the vision of the Angels, Jesus came as His 
Mat. 28, own Herald; and the Gospel says, And Jesus met them, saying 
All hail! and they came and held Him by the feet. The} 
held Him, that it might be fulfilled, / will hold Him, a/to 
/ /// not let Him go* The woman was weak indeed in body, 
Caut. 8, but in spirit was manful. Many waters cannot quench love, 
neither can the floods drown it; He was dead whom they 
sought, yet was not the hope of the Resurrection quenched. 
And the Angel says to them again, Fear not; I say not 
to the soldier s,fear not, but to you ; as for them, let them he 
afraid, that having learned by trial, they may bear witness 
and say, Truly this was the Son of God ; but you ought not 
l John 4, to he afraid, for perfect love casteth out fear ; go, tell His 

1 o 

disciples that He is risen ; and the rest. And they depart, 
fearful, yet with joy ; is this also written ? yes, the second 

Ps.2, 11. Psalm, which relates the Passion of Christ, says, Se-rve the 
Lord id th fear, and rejoice with trembling ; rejoice, because 
of the risen Lord ; but with trembling, because of the earth 
quake, and the Angel who appeared as lightning. 
(7.) 14. Though, therefore, Chief Priests and Pharisees through 
Pilate s means sealed the tomb ; yet the women beheld Him 
who was risen. And Esaias knowing the feebleness of the 

Is. 27, Chief Priests, and the women s strength of faith, says, Ye 

Sept. women, who are come from beholding, come hither ; for the 
people hath no understanding ; the Chief Priests want under 
standing, while women are eye-witnesses. And when the 
soldiers came into the city to them, and told them all that 

Mat. 28, had come to pass, they said to them, Say ye, His disciples 
came by night, and stole Him away ichile we slept. Well 
therefore has Esaias afore-time said this also, as in their 

Is. 30, persons, But tell us, and relate to us another deceit. He 
who rose again is up, and by bribes they persuade the 
soldiers ; but they persuade not the kings of our time. The 
soldiers then surrendered the truth for silver ; but the kings 
of this day have, in their piety, built this holy Church of the 
Resurrection of God our Saviour, inlaid with silver and 



l*in allt&gt;l t&gt;f Christ with Elijah (Did Eliahn. 173 

mil 1 with gold, in which we are assembled; and have 
embellished it with rarities of silver and gold and precious 
Belies. And if this come to the governors ears, they say, ire 
u-ill prrxuiulr him. Yea, though ye persuade the soldiers, 
\r will not persuade the world ; for why, as Peter s guards 
were condemned when he escaped out of ward, were not they 
also who watched Jesus Christ condemned ? It was because 
the former, on whom sentence was pronounced by Herod, 
were ignorant and had nothing to say for themselves ; while the 
latter who had seen the truth, and concealed it for money, were 
protected by the Chief Priests. Nevertheless, though but a few 
of the Jews were persuaded at the time, the world became obe 
dient. They who hid the truth, have been themselves hidden ; 
but they who received it w r ere made manifest by the power of 
the Saviour, who not only rose from the dead, but also raised 
the dead with Himself. And in the person of these the Prophet 
Osee says plainly, After two days will He revive us, and ///eHos.6,2 
third day will He raise us tip, and we shall live in His si(jht. 
15. But since the disobedient Jews will not be persuaded 
by the Divine Scriptures, but forgetting all that is written 
gainsay the Resurrection of Jesus, it were good to meet them 
thus: On what ground, while you say that Eliseus and Elias 
raised the dead, do you gainsay the Resurrection of our 
Saviour ? Is it that we have no living witnesses now out of 
that generation to what we say ? Well, do you also bring 
forward witness of those other deeds ? But that is written ;- 
so is this also written : why then do ye receive the one, and 
reject the other : They were Hebrews who wrote those 
things ; so were all the Apostles Hebrews : why then do ye 
disbelieve the Jews ? Matthew who wrote the Gospel wrote 
it in the Hebrew tongue d ; and Paul the preacher was an 
Hebrew of the Hebrews; and the twelve Apostles were all 
of Hebrew race: then fifteen Bishops of .Jerusalem 6 , were 
appointed in succession from among the Hebrews. What 
then is your reason for allowing your own accounts, and 
rejecting ours ? since these also are written by Hebrews from 
amonj; yourselves. 



&gt; s:iy Pai-ias. (apud Euseh. Hist. 51. 5.) 

iii. 39.) Origen, (ibid. vi. 26.) Jerom, i.e. till the destruction of Jeru- 
(prjpf. in Evang.) and Epiphanius. (Hjer. salem by Hadrian A.D. 134. 



1 74 Parallel qf Christ with Jonah. 

LECT. 16. But it is impossible, some one will say, that the dead 

"\T T ~\f 

- should arise ; and yet Eligeus twice raised the dead, when he 

was alive, and also when dead. Now, we believe, that when 
Eliseus was dead, a dead man who was cast upon him and 
touched him, arose ; is then Christ not risen ? But in that 
case, the dead man who touched Kliseus, arose, yet he who 
raised him continued nevertheless dead : now the Dead of 
whom we speak both arose Himself, and many dead were 

Mat. 27, raised without having even touched Him. For many bodies 

52. 53. O y tj le s a i n t s which slept arose, and came oat of the yrarvx 
after His Resurrection, and icent into the Holy City, 
(evidently this, in which we now are,) and appeared unto 
many. Eliseus then raised indeed a dead man, but he con 
quered not the world ; Klias raised a dead man, but devils 
are not driven away in the name of Elias. \\e are not j 
speaking against the Prophets, but we are making much of 
their Master; for we do not exalt our own by disparaging 
theirs ; for theirs are ours ; but by what happened among 
them, we recommend our own. 

(9.) 17. But they say again, " A corpse lately dead was raised by 
the living ; but shew us how one three days dead can pos 
sibly arise, how a man should be buried, and rise after three 
days." If we seek for Scripture testimony in proof, the 
Lord Jesus Christ Himself supplies it in the Gospels, saying, 

Mat. 12, Far as Jonas teas three days and three itiyhts in the whale s 
belly ; so shall the Son of man be three days and three night* 
in the heart of the ear Hi And on examining the story of 
Jonas, great is the force of the resemblance. Jesus was sent 
to preach repentance ; so also was Jonas ; though the one 
fled, not knowing what should come to pass; but the other 
came willingly, to give repentance unto salvation. Jonas 
. slumbered in the ship, and was fast asleep amidst the stormy 
- sea ; and while Jesus slept, according to God s providence, 
t ] ie sea began to rise, to shew in the sequel the might of Him 
Sept. who slept. To the one they said, Why art fhoti so fast in 

fiyxw. sleep ? Arise, call upon thy God, that God may save us ; but 

Mat. 8, in the other case they say unto the Master, Lord, save ns- 
25.26. The n ^y saic ^ i (l u U p Qn { j n j Goc i^ | iere t j ie ^ v sa ^ 2)0 Thou 

Jon. i, save. But the one says, Take me, and cast Me forth into the 
sea; so shall the sea be calm nnto you; the other. Himself 



hmwjht the old Fathers from Hades to Heaven. 175 

the li-inds and the sea, and there was a great calm. 
The one was cast into a whale s belly; but the other 
descended of His own accord thither, where is the invisible 
whale of death. And He descended of His own accord, that 
(K uth might cast forth those whom he had devoured, accord 
ing to that which is written, / will ransom them from the Ho s . 13, 
jiovrr of the grave ; I will redeem them from death. 

18. And here let us consider whether it be harder for a 
man after having been buried to rise again, or for a man in 
the belly of a whale, and in so great heat of a living creature, 
to escape corruption. For who among men knows not, that 
the heat of the belly is so great, that even bones which have 
been swallowed moulder away ? How then did Jonas, who 
was three days and three nights in the whale s belly, escape 
corruption ? And, seeing that the nature of all men is such 
that we cannot live without breathing, as we do, the air, how 
did he live without it for three days ? But the Jews make 
this answer, The power of God, they say, descended with 
Jonas when he was tossed about in hell. Then, does the 
Lord grant life to His own servant, by sending with him His 
power, and can He not grant it to Himself as well ? If that 
is credible, this is credible also ; if this is incredible, that also 
is incredible. For to me both are alike worthy of credence. 
I believe that Jonas was preserved, for all things are possible 
with God; I believe that Christ also was raised from the 
cU-ad ; for I have many testimonies of this, both from the 
Divine Scriptures, and from the operative power even at this 
day of Him who arose, who descended into hell alone, but 
who ascended thence with a great company; for He went down 
to death, and many bodies of the saints which slept arose 
through Him. 

19. Death was struck with dismay on beholding a new (10.) 
visitant descending into Hades, not bound by the chains of that 
place. Wherefore, O ye porters of Hades, when ye saw Him, 
wen- ye scared ? What unwonted fear seized you ? Death 
fled, and his flight betrayed his cowardice. The holy pro 
phets ran unto Him, and Moses the Lawgiver, and Abraham, 

and Isaac, and Jacob ; David also, and Samuel, and Esaias, 
and John the Baptist, who bore witness when he asked, 
Art Thou He that should come, or do we look for another ?T&*i. 11, 



3. 



17&lt;&gt; ./w/// .y prayer fulfilled in Chrixt o 

LKCT. All the Just were ransomed, whom death had devoured ; for 

"5CTV 

it behoved the King who had been heralded, to become the 



redeemer of His noble heralds. Then each of the Just said, 
l Cor. O death, ichere is thy sting ? O grave, where is thy victory? 
For the Conqueror hath redeemed us. 

20. Of this our Saviour, the Prophet Jonas wrought out a 

Jon. 2, 2. figure, from the belly of the whale praying and saying, I cried 

by reason of my affliction, and so on; out of the belly of hell, 

and yet he was in the whale ; yet though in the whale, 

he says that he is in hell ; for he was a figure of Christ, who 

should descend into Hades. And after a little, he says, in the 

Jon.2,6. person of Christ, prophesying most clearly, / went down to the 

chasms of the mountains; and yet he was in the belly of the 

whale. What mountains then encompass thee ? I know, he 

says, that I bear the figure of Him, who is to be laid in the 

Sepulchre hewn out of the rock. And being in the sea, 

Jon.2,7. Jonas says, / went doini to the earth, since he bore the figure 

Sept&gt; of Christ, who descended to the heart of the earth. And 

foreseeing that the Jews would persuade the soldiers to lie, 

and would tell them, Say that they stole Him away, he says, 

Jon.2,8. They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy. 

For He who pitied them came, and was crucified, and rose 

again, giving His own precious blood both for the Jews and 

the Gentiles ; yet they say, Say that they stole Him au*ay, 

observing lying vanities. But concerning His resurrection, 

Is. 63, Esaias also says, He who brought from the earth the great 

Heb.is Shepherd of the sheep ; he hath added the word, great, lest 

2 . He should be thought on a level with the shepherds who had 

partly 

from gone before Him. 

each. 21. Since then we have the prophecies, let faith abide with 
* us. Let them fall who fall through unbelief, since they so 
will ; but thou hast taken thy stand on the rock of faith in the 
Resurrection. Let no heretic ever persuade thee to speak evil 
of the Resurrection. For to this day do the Manichees say, 
that the resurrection of the Saviour was phantom-wise, and 

Rom. i, not real, slighting Paul who says, Who was made of the 
seed of David according to the flesh ; and again, By the re 
surrection of Jesus Christ our Lord from the dead. And 

Rom. again he aims at them, and speaks thus, Say not in thine 
o, 6. 7. fi ear t 9 w j )0 shall ascend into heaven ; or, who shall descend 



&lt;&gt;nr Lord s Resitrrerlion. 177 



into the deep f f/tfrf is, to briny up Christ ntjain. from 
dead; and in like manner warning as he has elsewhere 
written again, Remember that Christ Jesus was raised from 2 Tim. 2, 
the &lt;{(&gt;inf ; and again, And if Christ be not risen, then is 



preaching rain, and your faith is also vain. Yea, and we } 5, 14. 
u i &lt;&gt; found false witnesses of God ; because we have testified 
of God that He raised up Christ, whom He raised not up. 
But in what follows he says, But now is Christ risen from ver. 20. 
the dead, the first fruits of them that slept ; And He wa-sver.o. 
seen of ( eph&lt;is, then of the twelve ; (for if thou believe not one 
witness, thou hast twelve witnesses;) then He was seen of above ver. fi. 
five hundred brethren at once ; (if they disbelieve the twelve, 
let them admit the five hundred ;) then He was seen of James, 
His own brother, and first Bishop of this diocese. Seeing r 
then that such a Bishop originally saw Christ Jesus when risen, 
do not thou, his disciple, disbelieve him. But thou say 68 t that* 
His brother James was a partial witness ; Then He was seen v. 8. 
also of me Paul, His foe ; but what testimony is doubted, 
when an enemy proclaims it ? " I, once the persecutor, now 
preach the glad tidings of the Resurrection." 

22. Manv are the witnesses of the Saviour s resurrection. 

V 

The night, and the light of the full moon, (for that night was 
the sixteenth ;) and the rock of the sepulchre which received 
Him. The stone also shall rise up against the face of the 
Jews, for it saw the Lord ; even the stone which was then vid. sup. 
rolled away, itself testifies of the Resurrection, lying there to xm&lt; 39p 
this day. The Angels of God who were present testified of 
the Resurrection of the Only-begotten. Peter and John, and 
Thomas, and the rest of the Apostles ; some of whom ran 
to the sepulchre, and saw the burial-clothes, in which He was 
wrapped before, lying there after the Resurrection ; and 
others handled Mis hands and His feet, and beheld the prints 
of the nails; and all together enjoyed that salutary Breath, j 4 ,hn-:o, 
and were counted worthy to forgive sins in the power of the ~ 
Holy Ghost. Women too were witnesses, those who held His 
feet, and who beheld the mighty earthquake, and the radiance 
of the Angel who stood by. And the linen clothes which 

* On the question of the days of the well s Dissertations, vol. iii. Diss. 4. 
month Nisan on which the Crucifixion where passages from the Fathers on the 
and Resurrection took place, vid. Gres- subject are brought together. 

N 



178 nV///&lt;r. A-.svAV in an/- Lord a Resurrect inn. 

LECT. were rolled about Him, and which He left when He rose ; 

-er- T -TT- 

the soldiers, and the money given to them ; the spot itself 
also, yet to be seen ; and the house of this holy Church, 
which out of his loving affection to Christ, was by the Emperor 
Constantine of blessed memory, both built, and beautified as 
thou seest. 

23. A witness of the resurrection of Jesus is Tabitha also, 

who was in His name raised from the dead ; for how shall we 

disbelieve that Christ is risen, when even His Name has 

rid. sup. raised the dead? The sea also bears witness to the resur- 

1720. rect i on of Jesus, as thou hast heard before. The draught of 

fishes also testifies, and the fire of coals and the fish laid 

thereon. Peter also bears witness, who had erst denied Him 

thrice, and who then thrice confessed Him ; and was com- 

MT*. manded to feed His spiritual sheep. To this day stands 

Mount Olivet, still to the eves of the faithful all but dis- 

* 

playing Him mounting on a cloud, and the heavenly gate 
of His ascension. For He descended from heaven to Bethle 
hem, but to heaven He ascended from the Mount of Olives ; 
at the former place beginning His conflicts for men, but in 
the latter, crowned after them. Thou hast therefore many 
witnesses; thou hast this very place of the Resurrection; 
thou hast also the place of the Ascension towards the east; 
thou hast also for witnesses, the Angels which then bore 
witness; and the cloud on which He went up, and the 
disciples who came down from that place. 

(13.) 24. It follows in course, in teaching the Faith, to speak of 
*- the Ascension ; but the grace of God has so ordered it, that 
thou heard most fully concerning it, as far as our weakness 
x*r ;. allowed, yesterday, on the Lord s day ; since, by the pro- 
x*o^/av. v jcl ence of divine grace, the course of the Lessons in Church, 
included the account of our Saviour s going up into the hea 
vens ; and though what was then said was spoken for the 
sake of all, and for the united body of the faithful, yet was it 
especially for thy sake. Now I ask, didst thou attend to what 
was said ? Thou knowest that the words which come next 
in the Creed teach thee to believe in Him " who rose again 
the third day, and ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the 
right hand of the Father." Now I suppose that thou cer 
tainly rememberest the exposition; yet I will now also cursorily 



of our fiord s (/.WM. OH. 179 



put thec in mind of what was then said. Remember what is 
distinctly written in the Psalms, God is gone tip tcilh a shout; ps.47,5. 
n member that the divine Powers also said to one another, 
I. if I up your yules, ye Pri/ices, and the rest; remember alsoPs.24,7. 
the Psalm which says, Thou /nisi ascended on high, Tliou fe&lp^gg 
led c iptii ihj captire; remember the Prophet who says, JF7/018. 

A \\\ o^ ^J 

buildeth His ascension unto heaven ; and the other particulars 6 Sept 
mentioned yesterday with a view to the gainsaying of the( rnar -) 
Jews. 

-2- ). For when they gainsay the ascension of the Saviour, 
a&gt; being impossible, remember the account of the carrying 
away of Ifabakkuk: for if Habakkuk was transported by the Bel and 
Angel, being earned by the hair of his head, much rather v 



was the Lord of both Prophets and Angels, powerful with His r . Dan - 
own strength to mount on a cloud from the Mount of Olives 



into the Heavens, it is well to bear in mind wonders like to 
this, but reserve thou the preeminence for the Lord, the 
Worker of wonders ; for the others were borne up, but He 
bears up all things. Remember that Enoch was translated ; 
but Jesus ascended : remember what was said yesterday 
concerning Elias, that Elias was taken up in a chariot ofvid.2 
fire; but that the chariots of Christ are twenty thousand, } /" 
ercn thousands of Angels: and that Elias was taken up, Ps. 68, 
towards the east of Jordan ; but that Christ ascended at 
the east of the brook Cedron : and that Elias went as into 2 Kings 
hearen ; but Jesus, into heaven: and that Elias said thatg 1 / 
a double portion in the Holy Spirit should be given to his 
disciple; but that Christ granted to His own disciples so 
great enjoyment of the grace of the Holy Ghost, as not only 
to have it in themselves, but also, by the laying on of their 
hands, to impart the fellowship of it to them who believed. 

2(j. And when thou ail thus wrestling against the Jews, (14.) 
after thou hast worsted them by parallel instances, then 
come further to the preeminence of the Saviour s glory. For 
they were servants, but He the Son of God. And this will 
remind thee of His preeminence, that the servant of Christ 
was caught up to the third heaven. Eor if Elias attained 
n^ far as the first heaven, but Paul as far as the third, the 
latter has doubtless obtained a more honourable dignity. 
Be not ashamed of thine Apostles ; they are not inferior to 

N -2 



180 The Apostles more highly favoured than the Prophets. 

LECT. Moses, or behind the Prophets; but they are noble with the 
- - noble, yea, than the noble yet more noble. For Elias truly 



was taken up into heaven ; but Peter has the keys of the 
Mat. 16, kingdom of heaven, having received the words, Whatsoever 

thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Elias 

2 Cor. was taken up only to heaven ; but Paul both into heaven, 

"and into paradise ; (for it behoved the disciples of Jesus to 

receive more manifold grace ;) and heard unspeakable worth, 

which it is not Unrfnl for a man to utter. But Paul descended 

. * 

again from above, not because he was unworthy to abide in 
the third heaven, but in order that after having enjoyed 
things above man s reach, and descended in honour, and 
having preached Christ, and died for His sake, he might 
in addition receive the crown of martyrdom. I pass over the 
rest of this argument, as I went through it yesterday in the 
Lord s dav service; for with understanding hearers, a recapi- 
tulation is sufficient for instruction. 

(15.) 27. And remember also what I have often said concerning 
the Son s sitting at the right hand of the Father; because 
that comes next in the Creed, thus, i And who is ascended into 
heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father. Let 
us not curiously pry into what is properly meant by the 
throne; for it is incomprehensible: nor endure those who 
falsely say, that it was after His Cross and Resurrection and 
Ascension into heaven, that the Son began to sit on the right 
hand of the Father . For the Son gained not His throne by 
advancement ; but from the time that He is, (and He is ever 
begotten,) He also sitteth together with the Father. And this 
throne the Prophet Esaias having beheld before the incarnate 
connng of the Saviour, says, / saw the Lord sitting on a 
throne, high and lifted up, and the rest. For the Father no 
[s 6 ll man hath seen at any time, and He who then appeared to 
Ps.93,2.the Prophet was the Son. And the Psalmist says, Thy throne 
is established of old; Thou art from everlasting. But though 
many are the testimonies on this point, yet because of the 
lateness of the time, we will content ourselves only with 
these. 

28. Our present business is to remind you of a few out of 
much which I said concerning the Son s sitting at the right 

l The Paulianwts. 



- 



es concttrniny oar lord s sitting at God 9 a riyht hand. 181 

hand of the Father. For the hundred and ninth Psalm says 
plainly, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on My right p^ no, 
//"////, until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool. And the 1 
Saviour, confirming in the Gospel what is here said, says that 
David spake not these things of himself, but by the inspira 
tion of the Holy Ghost, saving, How then doth David mMat.22, 

43 

/if call Him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, 
Sit Thou on My right hand, and the rest. And in the Acts of 
the Apostles, Peter on the day of Pentecost standing with the 
Eleven, and discoursing to the Israelites, has in very words Acts 2, 
cited this testimony from the hundred and ninth Psalm. 

29. A few other testimonies must also be suggested 
concerning the Son s sitting at the right hand of the Father. 

In the Gospel according to Matthew it is written, Neverthe- Mat.26, 
less, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man 64 * 
sitting on the right hand of power, and the rest. And follow 
ing this the Apostle Peter also says, By the Resurrection of\ Pet. 3, 
Jesus Christ, who is gone into heaven, and is on the right 
hand of God. And the Apostle Paul, writing to the Romans, 
says, It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, Rom. 8, 
n ho is even at the right hand of God. And charging the 34 
Ephesians, he thus speaks, According to the working of HisK\h. 1, 
ndghty power, which He wrought in Christ when He raised 19 W 
Hun from the dcod, and set Him at His own right hand; and 
the rest. And he thus taught the Colossians, If ye then be Col. 3, 
risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where l 
Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. And in the Epistle 
to the Hebrews he says, When He had purged our sins, HeHe\&gt;. l, 

dtncii &lt;&gt;n the right hand of the Majesty on high. And 3 
again, But unto which of the Angels said He at any time,\er. 13. 
Sit thoti dt Mi/ right hand, until I make thine enemies thy 
footstool / And again, But this Man, after He had offered Heb.io, 

le Mirrijice for sin, for eccr sat down on the right hand of l&lt;2 
Bod; from henceforth expecting till His enemies be made 
His footstool. And again, Looking unto Jesus, the Author Heb. 12, 

/ riiiis/icr of our faith ; who for the joy that was set before 2 - 
Him cndun;! t/u&gt; Cross, despising t/i&lt;&gt; shnim*, and is ,sv/ 
wn on the right hand of the throne of God. 

30. And though there are many other texts concerning the 
-sion of the Only -begotten on the right hand of God, yet 



Exhortation u/td 

LECT, let these suffice us at present; with a repetition of my 
-remark, that it was not alter His coming in the flesh that He 
obtained the dignity of this scat; no, for even before all ages, 
the Only -begotten Son of God, who is our Lord Jesus, ever 
has the throne on the right hand of the Father. Now may 
He Himself, the God of all, who is Father of Christ, and our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who came down, and ascended, and sitteth 
together with the Father, watch over your souls ; keep 
unshaken and unchanged your hope in Him who rose again ; 
raise you together with Him from your dead sins, to His 
1 Thess. heavenly gift ; count you worthy to be cauyht up in the 

*1 17 

clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, in His fitting time; and, 
until that time arrive of His glorious second advent, write all 
your names in the Hook of the living, and having written them, 
never blot them out. (For many, those who fall away, have 
their names blotted out.) And may He grant to all of you to 
believe on Him who rose again, and to look for Him who is 
gone up, and is to come again, (to come, but not from the 
earth; for be on your guard, O man, because of the deceivers 
who are to come ;) who sitteth on high, and is here present 
Col. 2, together with us, beholding the order of each, and the sled- 

^ 

fastness of his faith. For think not that because He is 

absent in the flesh, He is therefore absent also in the Spirit. 

He is here present in the midst of us, listening to what 
Ps. 7,9. is said of Him, and beholding what is in thv mind, and 
Ur\. -2, tryimj the reins and the hearts; who also is now ready to 

present those who are coming to Baptism, and all of you, in 
Is. 8, 18. the Holy Ghost to the Father, and to say, Behold, I and the 
llei). 2, c ] t tldren H ham God hath yiren Me : To whom be glory for 

ever. Amen. 



LECTURE XV. 



ON THE SECOND ADVENT, THE LAST JUDGMENT, AND THE 
PERPETUITY OF CHRIST S KINGDOM. 



DANIEL vii. 9 14. 

/ beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of 
days did sit, fyc. . . . The judgment ivas set, and the books 
were opened, fyc. . . . I saiv in the night visions, and behold 
one like the Son of Man came ivith the clouds of heaven, 
and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought Him 
near before Him, And there was given Him dominion, fyc. 
. . . His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which 
not pass away, 



1. WE preach not one advent only of Christ, but a second 
also, far more glorious than the former. For the former gave 
to view His patience ; but the latter brings with it the crown 
of the divine kingdom. For all things, to speak generally, 
arc twofold in our Lord Jesus Christ. His generation is 
twofold : the one, of God, before the worlds ; the other, of the 
Virgin in the end of the world. His descent is twofold : one 
was in obscurity, like the dew on the fleece; the second is v&lt; p s&lt; 72 
His open coining, which is to be. In His former advent, He 6 - vid 
was wrapped in swaddling clothes in the manger; in His Cat. xii. 
second, He covereth Himself with light as with a garment.^ 

I S 1. V T 1 * 

In His first coming, He endured the Cross, despising thei. 
film me ; in His second, He comes attended by the Angel 2 
h"st, receiving glory. Let us not then rest in His first 
advent, but look also for His second. And as we have said 
at His first coming, Blessed is He that cometh in the Nome Mat. 21 
of the Lord, so will we repeat the same at His second 9 * 
coming ; that with the Angels meeting our Master, we may 23, 39. 



184 The first and second coming t&gt;f Christ. 

LECT. worship Him and say, Blessed is He that cometh in the 

- Name of the Lord. The Saviour comes, not to be judged 

again, but to judge them who judged Him ; He who before 

was silent when judged, shall arraign those transgressors 

who did those daring deeds at the Cross, and shall say, 

Ps. 50, These things hast tlwii done, and I kept silence. Then, He 
came ky a divine disposition, teaching men with persuasion; 



*- 



/ but this time they will of necessity have Him for their King, 
though they wish it not. 

2. And concerning these two comings, Malachi the Prophet 
Mai. 3, says, And the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to His 
; behold the first coming. And again of the second 



coming he says, And the Messenger of the covenant whom ye 

SeeSept. deliijht in. Behold^ lit shall come, even the Lord Almighty; 

but who may of tide the day of His coming ; and who shall 

stand when He appcareth / For He is like a refiner s fire, 

and like fuller s sope ; and He shall sit as a refiner and 

purifier of silver. And immediately after the Saviour Himself 

ver. 5. says, And I will come near to you to Judgment ; and I will 

he a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the 

adulterers, and against the false swearers, and the rest. For 

i Cor. 3, this cause Paul warning us beforehand says, If any man 

build on this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, 

hay, stubble ; every man s work shall be made manifest ; for 

the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire. 

Paul also signifies these two comings, writing to Titus and 

Tit. 2. saying, The grace of God our Saviour hath appeared unto all 

y^ men, tcac/nng us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, 

"ft/if we should /ire soberly, righteously, and godly in this present 

&lt; :yV. world ; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appear- 

2*- i n g qf tf ie great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ. Thou 

nari.i* seest how he has spoken of the first, for which he gives 

rtl( f * thanks ; and of the second, to which we look forward. Where- 

rec. text. 

fore the words of the Faith we profess, run thus ; that we 
should believe in Him, " who again is ascended into heaven, 
and sitteth on the right hand of the Father, and shall come 
in glory to judge the quick and dead ; w r hose kingdom shall 
have no end." 

(2.) 3. Our Lord Jesus Christ, then, comes from heaven ; and 
He comes with glory at the end of this world, in the last day. 



The visible iror Id perchance will have a resurrection. 185 

For this world shall have an end, and this created world 
shall be made new. For since corruption, and theft, andv. ifos. 
adultery, and every sort of sins, have been poured forth over ^ 
the earth, and blood has been mingled with blood in the 
world, therefore, that this wondrous dwelling-place may not 
remain filled with iniquity, this world shall pass away, that 
that fairer world may be made manifest. And wouldest thou 
receive the proof of this out of the express words of Scripture ? 
Listen to Esaias, saying, And the heavens shall be rot led Is. 34, 4. 
together us a scroll ; and all their host shall fall down, as the 
h&gt;&lt;if fttUeth off from the vine, and as a falling jig from the 
fuj-tree. And the Gospel says, The sun shall be darkened, Mat. 24, 
mill the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall^ 
from heaven. Let us not sorrow, as if we alone died; the 
stars also shall die; and perhaps rise again. And the Lord 
shall roll up the heavens, not that He may destroy them, but 
that He may raise them up again more beautiful. Hear 
David the Prophet saying, Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast PS. 102, 
laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the Jf e " b & J" 
work of Thy hands ; they shall perish, but Thou remainest. 10. 
But some one will say, Behold, he says plainly that they shall 
perish. Hear in what sense he says, they shall perish ; it is 
plain from what follows ; And they all shall wax old as 
doth a garment ; and as a vesture shalt Thou fold them up, 
"nd they shall be changed. For as a man is said to 
perish," according to that which is written, The righteous is. 57,1. 
f rixheth, and no man layeth it to heart, and this, though 
the resurrection is looked for, so we look for a resurrection, 
as it were, of the heavens also. The sun shall be turned into Joel 2, 
ilnrkness, and the moon into blood. 1 1 ore let converts from 31 
the Manichees gain instruction, and no longer make those 
lights their gods ; nor impiously think, that this sun which 
shall be darkened is Christ. And again hear Christ saying, 
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My words shall ra#lMat.24, 
pa.ix t nniy ; for the creatures are not equal in honour with the 35 * 
Master s words. 

4. The things then which are seen shall pass away, and 
there shall come the things which are looked for, things 
fairer than these ; but as to the time let no one be curious. 
For it is not for yon, He says, to know the times and MeActsi.7. 



S /V/y/.v of ( ///vi7 ,v {second 

LECT. seasons -, w7//V7* Me Father hath put in His own power. And 
venture not them to declare when these things shall be, nor on 

Wat. 24, the other hand abandon thyself to slumber. For he saith, 
lV(ttch,for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of Man 
(3.) comet ft. But seeing that it behoved us to know the signs of 
the end, and whereas we are looking for Christ, therefore, that 
we may not be deceived and perish, nor be led astray by that 
false Antichrist, the Apostles, moved by the divine will, address 
i- themselves by a provMential arrangement to the True Teacher, 
anc ^ sa y&gt; Tell us, when shall these thinys be, and ivhat shall be 

3. the sign of Thy coinhnj, and of the aid of the world? We look 
for Thee to come again, but Satan is transformed into an Angel 
of light; put us therefore on our guard, that we may not wor 
ship another instead of Thee. And He, opening His divine 

Ver. 4. and blessed mouth, says, Take heed that no man deceive you. 
And you, hearers, who now as it were see Him with the eyes 
of your mind, listen to Him saying the same things to you 
likewise ; Take heed that no -man deceive you. And this 
word exhorts you all to give heed to what is spoken ; for it 
is not a tale of things gone by, but a prophecy of things 
future, and which will surely come. We prophecy not, for 
we are unworthy ; but we set before you the things which 
are written, and tell you the signs. Observe thou, which 
of them have already come to pass, and which yet remain; 
and make thyself safe. 

Mat. 24, 5. Take heed that no man deceive you: for many shall 

First come in My name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive 



many. This has happened in part: for ere now Simon Magus 
said this, and Menander, and some others of the godless 
leaders of heresy ; and others say it in our days, or shall 
say it after us. 

Second &lt;&gt;. The second sign. And ye shall hear of ivars and numnirs 
I b^v. 6. f wars. Is there then at this time war between Persians 
and Romans for Mesopotamia, or no ? Does nation rise 
up against nation and kingdom against kingdom, or no? 
Luke2i, And there shall be famines and pestilences and earthquakes 
ti u- ul &lt;tivers places. These things have already come to pass; 
, Cyr. and again, And fearful sights from heaven, and mighty 
Watch therefore, he says, for ye /CHOW not what 



Mat. 24, fr our y 0lir Lord doth come. 

42. J 



ii ,m&lt;t strife between Bishop* end between Churches. 

7. Next \ve seek our own sign of His coming; we members (4.) 
of tin- Church seek the Church s sign. And the Saviour says,***w- 
,1ml then shall many be offended, and shall betray owe Mat. 24, 
another, ami shall hale one another. If thou hear that 10 - 
bishops advance against bishops, and clergy against clergy, 
and neople against people even unto blood 3 , be not troubled; 
for it has been written before. Heed not the things now hap 
pening, but the things which are written ; nor even though 1 
who teach thee perish, do thou perish with me ; nay, a hearer 
inav even become better than his teacher, and he who came 

i 

last may be first, since even those of the eleventh hour the 
Master receives. If among the Apostles there was found trea 
son, dost thou wonder that even among bishops there is found 
hatred of the brethren ? But the sign concerns not only 
rulers, but the people also ; for He says, And because iniquity i\&gt;.v. 12. 
shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. Will any 
then among those present boast that he entertains friendship 
unfeigned towards his neighbour ? Do not the lips often kiss, 
and the countenance smile, and the eyes brighten forsooth, 

* S. Cyril here describes the state of ruined by their hasty and repeated 
the Church, \\hen orthodoxy was for a journeys." Hist. xxi. 16. S. Hilary of 
while trodden under foot, its maintainers Poictiers thus speaks of Asia Minor, the 
per- nited, and the varieties of Arianism, chief seat of the Arian troubles: " Itisa 
which took its place, were quarrelling thing equally deplorable and dangerous, 
for the ascendancy. Gibbon quotes two that there are as many creeds as opinions 
. one from a pagan historian of among men, as many doctrines as inclin- 
e day, another from a Father of the ations, and as many sources of bias- 
Church, which fully bear out S. Cyril s phemy as there are faults among us; 
irds. What made the state of things because we make creeds arbitrarily, and 
il more deplorable, \\ a&lt; the defection explain tht-m as arbitrarily. The Homo- 
-oine of the orthodox party, as Mar- ousion is rejected and received and ex- 
ilus, into opposite errors; while th,- plained away by successive synods. The 
bsequi -sions of Apollinnris and partial or total resemblance of the Father 
i er, &gt;ht w what lurking disorders and of the Son is a subject of dispute 
ere within it at the time when for these unh:appy divines. Every year, 
S. Cyril wrote. (Vid. infra 9.) The nay, every moon, we make new creeds 
cferred to are as follows: to describe invisible mysteries. We re- 
hristian l\eligion,"says Ammi- pent of what we have done, we defend 
If plain and simple, he those who repent, we anathematize those 
istantius) confounded by the dotage whom we defended. We condemn either 
rstition. Instead of reconciling the doctrine of others in ourselves, or our 
the parties by the weight of his authority, own in that of others; and reciprocally 
herished and propagated) by vain tearing one another to pieces, we have 
s the differences which his vain been the cause of each other s ruin." ad 
y had excited. The highways Constant, ii. t, 5. Gibbon s translations 
&lt;&gt; covered with troops of Bishops, are used,which, though diffuse, are faith- 
gallopin from every side to the a&lt;&gt;, in- ful in their matter. What a contrast 
hioh they call synods ; and while do these descriptions present to Athana- 
lahoured to reduce the whole sect to sius uniform declaration, that the whole 
th&lt; ir own particular opinions, the public question w as really settled at Nictea, and 
iUhment of the post no other synod or debate was necessary ! 



188 Divisions in the Church make way for Antichrist. 

LECT. while the heart is planning guile, and plotting mischief with 
words of peace ? 



Fourth 8. Thou hast this sign also. And this Gospel of the king- 
" 14 aom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all 
nations, and then shall the end come. And as we see, 
nearly the whole world is now filled with the doctrine of 
Christ 

9. And what comes to pass after this ? When ye therefore 
v. 15. shall see the Abomitmtion of Desolation, spoken of by Daniel 
the Prophet, stand in the Holy Place, (whoso r cade tit, let him 

lb.v.28.nnderstand.) And again, Then if any man shall say unto you, 
Lo, here is Christ, or, there, believe it not. Hatred of the bre 
thren makes room next for Antichrist ; for the devil prepares 
beforehand divisions among the people, that he who is to 
come may be acceptable to them. But God forbid that any 
of Christ s servants here, or elsewhere, should side with the 
enemy ! Concerning this matter the Apostle Paul writing 

2 Thess. has given a manifest sign, saying, For that day shall not 

2,3-10. com&9 except there come a falling away first, and that man 
of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, who opposeth and 
exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is 
worshipped ; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, 
shewing himself that he is God. Remember ye not that when 
I teas yet with yon, I told yon these things ? And now ye 
know what tcithholdetJi, that he might be revealed in his time. 
For the mystery of iniquity doth already work, only he who 
now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way. And 
then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall 
consume with the spirit of His mouth, and shall destroy with 
the brightness of His coming. Even him, whose coming is 
after the working of Satan, with all power and signs and 
lying wonders, and with all deceivdbleness of unrighteousness 
in them that perish. Thus wrote Paul, and now is the 

itr*tt- falling away. For men have fallen away from the right 
faith ; and some preach the identity of the Son with the 
Father, and others dare to say that Christ was brought into 
being, from a substance which had a beginning. And 
formerly the heretics were manifest ; but now the Church is 
filled with heretics in disguise. For men have fallen away 

2 Tim. from the truth, and have itching ears. Is it a plausible 

4, 3. 









Sutanfurestalledthe Truth in paganism,to prejudice men against, it. \ 89 

theory ? all listen to it gladly. Is it a word of correction ? 
all turn away from it. Most have departed from right words, &lt;5^v. 
and rather choose the evil, than desire the good. This there 
fore is the falling atcay, and the enemy is soon to be looked 
for : and already he has begun to send forth his forerunners b , 
that being ready, he may then come upon the prey. Look 
therefore to thyself, O man, and watch over thy soul. The 
Church now charges thee before the Living God ; she de 
clares to thee the things concerning Antichrist before they 
arrive. Whether they will happen in thy time we know riot, or 
whether they will happen after thee we know not ; but it is well 
that, knowing these things, thou shouldest be on thy guard. 

10. The true Christ, the Only -begotten Son of God, conies (4.) 
no more from the earth. If any come seeing visions in the 
wilderness, go not forth; if they say, Lo, here is Christ, lo, Mat. 24, 
there, believe it not. Downwards and to the earth look no 
longer ; for the Sovereign descends from heaven, not alone as 
before, but with many, attended by tens of thousands of 
Angels; nor secretly as the dew on the fleece; but shining v.Ps.72, 

&gt; 

forth openly as the lightning. For He hath said Himself, 
As the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even 7/72/0 Mat. 24, 
the west, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be ; and 
again, And they shall see the Son of Man coming in ///elh.v.30. 
clouds irith potcer and great glory, and He shall send His 
Angels with a great sound of a trumpet ; and the rest. 

11. But as, when fonnerly he was to take man s nature, 
and God was expected to be born of a Virgin, the devil, to 
create prejudice against this, craftily spread fables before 
hand among the idol-worshippers, of false gods, begetting 
and born of women, that, the falsehood having got possession 
of the ground, the truth also, as he supposed, might be disbe 
lieved ; so now, since the true Christ is to come a second time, 
the adversary, taking advantage of the expectation of the sim 
ple, and especially of them of the circumcision, brings in a cer 
tain man who is a wizard, and most expert in the beguiling 
craftiness of sorceries and enchantments ; who shall seize 



6 revs ieturou ffgdjMpMfi The Arian gory calls the Bishop of Constantinople 

troubles ; this was the common opinion of his day a " forerunner of Antichrist," 

of the Fathers of the day. Vid. Athan. as being ambitions of the title of Univer- 

Apol. contr. Arian. fin. Basil. Ep. 264. sal Bishop, and creating divisions in the 

Hilar. in Auxent. ;"&gt;. Hence Pope Gre- Church. Vid. Epist. vii. 33. 



190 Antichnxl kiny ; /tix / riy/t ////v.v&gt; y&n ti n/nl u half. 



T.F.CT. upon the power of the Roman empire, and shall falsely stylo 
- himself Christ ; by this name of Christ deceiving the Jews, 



T&lt;J X&lt; 

tfvttref. 



who were looking for the Anointed, and seducing those of the 
Gentiles by his magical illusions. 

12. But this aforesaid Antichrist comes when the times of 
the Roman empire shall have been fulfilled, and the end of 
the world is now drawing near. There shall ris. up together 
ten kings of the Romans, reigning in different parts perhaps, 
but all about the same time ; and after these shall arise Anti 
christ, the eleventh king, who by his magical craft shall seize 
upon the Roman power ; and of the kings who reigned before 
him, thn &lt; i he shall humble, and the remaining seven he shall 
p in subjection to himself. At first indeed he will put on 
a shew of mildness, (as though he were a learned and discreet 
person,) and of soberness and benevolence: and having by 
the signs and lying wondi r&gt; of his magical deceit, beguiled 
the Jews, as though he were the expected Christ, he shall 
afterwards characterize himself by all kinds of excesses of 
cruelty and lawlessness, so as to outdo all unrighteous and 
ungodly men who have gone before him ; displaying against 
all men, but especially against us Christians, a spirit mur 
derous and ruthless, merciless and crafty. And he shall 
perpetrate such things for three years and six months onl 
and then he shall be destroyed by the glorious second advent 
from heaven of the only-begotten Son of God, our Lord and 
2Thes.2, Saviour Jesus, the true Christ, who shall slay Antichrist icilh 
8 * /he spiril of His month, and shall deliver him over to the fire 

of hell. 

(5.) 13. Now these things we teach, not of our own ingenuity, 
but having learned them out of the divine Scriptures of the 
Church, and chiefly from the prophecy of Daniel in the text; 
as Gabriel also the Archangel interpreted it, speaking thus; 
Dan. 7, The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom upon earth, 
which shall surpass all kingdom*. And that this kingdom is 
that of the Romans, has been the tradition of the Church s in 
terpreters. For as the first kingdom which became renowned 
was that of the Assyrians, and the second, that of the Medes 
and Persians together, and after these, that of the Mace 
donians was the third, so the fourth kingdom now is that of 
the Romans. Then Gabriel goes on to interpret, saying, 



Antichrist will pretend to nt inn-It^: /te ici/l ahhnr idols. 



And the ten hunts out of this kingdom nro ten kings M^/ver. 24. 
shall arise ; and another king shall rise up after I hem, find ep 
/// shall Nur/Hiss in wickedness all who were before him ; (he 
&gt;a\s, not only the ten, but also all who were before him;) 
(Old he sh&lt;t II sithdt f three kings ; (manifestly out of the ten 
former kings, but it is plain that having subdued three, he will 
be the eighth king 6 ;) and he shall speak great words against v - 25. 
the Most High. A blasphemer is he and an outrageous 
person, not inheriting his kingdom from his fathers, but 
usurping power by means of sorcery. 

14. And who is this, and of what sort of working ? Inter 
pret to us, O Paul. Whose coming, he says, /* after Me2Thes.2, 
working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying* 
winders ; implying, that Satan uses him as an instrument, 
working personally through him : for knowing that his judg- 
mcnt hath now no longer respite , he henceforth wages wa* 
no more bv his ministers, as is his wont, but by himself mort 

* 

openly. And in all signs and lying wonders ; for the father 
of falsehood will make a shew of the works of falsehood, that 
tin 1 multitude may think that they see a dead man raised, when 
he is not raised, and the lame walking, and the blind seeing, 
when the cure has not been wrought. 

1 ). And again he says. Who opposeth and exalteth himself (6.) 
ft/tare all that is called God, or (hat is worshipped ; (above 
every God; Antichrist therefore will abhor the idols,) so 
that he sittefh in the temple of God. What temple ? He 
means the Temple of the Jews which has been destroyed. 
For God forbid that it should be the one in which we arc ! 
Wherefore say we this ? lest we should be supposed to favour 
ourselves. For since he comes to the .h-ws as Christ, and 
desires to be worshipped by the Jews, he will make great 
account of the Temple, that he may more completely beguile 
them ; making it seem that he is the man of the race of 
David, who shall build up the Temple which was erected by 

loinon*. And Antichrist shall come at the time when 
tin ; shall not be left one stone upon another in the Temple, 

c u And the beast that was, and is e This was the common opinion of the 

not, even he is the eighth, and is of the early Fathers, vid. Iren. H;i&gt;r. v. 25. 3o. 

i, and goeth into perdition." Rev. Greir. JSa/. Oral. 47- 14. &c. Cyril 

IT, 11. wrote this before Julian s attempt to 

d Vid. Iren. Hser. v. 26. 2. rebuild the Jewish Temple. 



19-2 The persecution under Antichrist. 

LHCT. according to the doom pronounced by our Saviour ; for 

"^r "\y" 

when, either through decay of time, or demolition for the use 



of new buildings, or ensuing from other causes, every stone 
shall have been overthrown, not merely of the outer circuit, but 
of the shrine also, where the Cherubim were, then shall he come 
with all signs and lying wonders, exalting himself against all 
idols ; at first indeed feigning a philanthropic, but afterwards 
displaying his relentless temper, and that chiefly against the 
Dan. 7, Saints of God. For he says, And I beheld, and the same horn 
made w&lt;t i with the saints; and again elsewhere 1 , and there shall 

JUan. l&lt;) 

1. be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation 
even to that same time. Dreadful is that beast, a mighty 
dragon, unconquerable by man, ready to devour ; concerning 
whom though we have more things to speak out of the 
Divine Scriptures, yet we will content ourselves with thus 
much, in order to keep within compass. 

16. Wherefore the Lord knowing the mightiness of the 
adversary, extends his indulgence to the religious, saying, 

Mat. 2i, Then let them which be in Judea flee to the mountains. 
i fi 

But if any man is conscious that he is very stout-hearted, to 

encounter Satan, let him stand ; (for I do not despair of the 
Rom. 8, Church s nerves,) and let him say, Who shall separate us from 
35&gt; the love of Christ. Thus, let those of us who are fearful 
provide for our own safety ; and let those of us who are of a 
Mat. 24, good courage, remain : for there shall be great tribulation, 
21 * such as was not since the beginning of the world, no, nor ever 
shall be. But thanks be to God who hath confined the 
v. 22. violence of that tribulation to a few days ; for He says, But 
for the elect s sake those days shall be shortened ; and Anti 
christ shall reign for three years and a half only. We speak 
- not from Apocryphal books*, but from Daniel; for he says, 

r Even S. Chrysostom, after the awful of Antichrist always appeal to the Apo- 

defeat of Julian s attempt, which was calypse as well a,s to Daniel. Vid. Iren. 

attended by a considerable disturbance v. 26. 1. Hippol. de Antichr. 34. &c. 

of the ground on which the Temple had Cyril then must have intentionally 

stood, pronounces that the prophecy omitted mention of the Apocalypse in 

against "one stone on another" was treating this subject; and he here seems 

not yet fulfilled, vid. Horn. 75. in Matt, to give the reason of it. At the same time 

Ed. Ben. he may be alluding to other Apocryphal 

5 "Some have thought that Cyril here works, e. g. those of the Millenarians, 
alludes to the Apocalypse." (vid. note a &c." Ed. Ben. The Canonieity of the 
on Catech. iv. 33. p. 48. Ibid, note c on Apocalypse is sufficiently established by 
36. p. 51.) "which is not improbable... its general reception by the Church in the 
All those ancient writers, w r hom he fol- fifth centtiry, whatever doubts before ex- 
lows in thi* Lecture, in their description isted in particular parts of Christendom. 



* 



Marty rs in the time (tf Antichrist. l!.):i 

.Ind then shall be &lt;iiren info his hand until a time and times Van. 7, 

25 

and Ihe dividing of time. A time is the one year in which 
his coining shall have increase; and the times are the 
remaining two years of iniquity, which make up the sum of 
the three years ; and the dividing of time is the six months. 
And again in another place Daniel says the same thing, ^wt/Dan.12, 
he turn re by Him that liveth for erer that it shall be for a 
time, time*, and a half. And some peradventure have 
referred what follows also to this; namely, the thousand ;roDan.i2, 
hundred and ninety days; and, Blessed is he that icaiteth 
and cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and 
thirty days. For this cause we must hide ourselves and fly ; 
for perhaps ice shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, Mat. 10, 
//// the Son of Man be come. 

17. Who then is that blessed man, who shall at that time (8.) 
devoutly witness for Christ? For I say that those Martyrs 
excel all martyrs. For hitherto they have only wrestled with 
men ; but the Martyrs in the time of Antichrist shall do battle 
with Satan in his own person. And former persecuting kings 
have only put to death ; they have not pretended to raise the 
dead, nor shewed the appearance of signs and wonders. 
But in his time there shall be the evil seductions both of fear 
and of deceit, insomuch that if it were possible they ,?//// Mat. 24, 
deceive the very elect. Let it never enter into the heart of 
any then alive to ask, " What did Christ more ? By what 
power does this man work these things ? Unless God had 
pleased, He would not have allowed them." The Apostle 
warns thee and says beforehand, And for this cause God 
shall send them strong delusion; (send, that is, shall allow / O 
happen ;) not that they might be excused, but that they might 
h&lt; da /fined. Wherefore? They, he says, irho believed not the 
trufh, that is, the true Christ, but had pleasure in un righte 
ousness , that is, in Antichrist. But God permits these things, 
as in the persecutions which happen from time to time, so 
also then, not because He wants power to hinder them, but 
because according to His wont He crowns His own Cham 
pions by means of patience, as He did His own Prophets and 
Apostles ; to the end that after having toiled for a little while 
they may inherit the eternal kingdom of heaven, according 
to that which Daniel says, .-///// at thai time tin/ people 

o 



104 The com? jig of Christ. 

LECT. be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the 
book, (manifestly, the book of life ;) and wany (&gt;f them that 



in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to crer lasting 
life, and some to shame and everlasting content j it ; and they 
that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament ; 
and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever 
and ever. 

18. Take precautions then, O man ; thou hast the signs of 
Antichrist ; do not merely keep them in mind thyself, but 
impart them also freely to all. If thou hast a child according 
to the flesh, now admonish him of this ; if thou hast begotten 
one through catechising, put him also on his guard, lest he 

2 Thess. receive the false one as the True. For the mystery of iniquity 
2 7&gt; dnth already work. I fear these wars of the nations ; 1 fear 
the divisions of the churches ; I fear the mutual hatred of the 
brethren. But enough on this subject; only God forbid that 
it should be fulfilled in our days ; nevertheless, let us be on 
our guard. And thus much concerning Antichrist. 

19. But let us wait and look for the Lord s coming upon the 
clouds from heaven. Then shall the Angelic trumpets sound; 
the dead in Christ shall rise first, the religious persons, who 

A 1 f^. 

are alive shall be caught up in the clouds, receiving as the 
reward of their labours, more than human honour, inasmuch 
as theirs was a more than human strife ; according as the 
v. 16.17. Apostle Paul writes, saying, For the Lord Himself shall 
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Arch- 
angel, and with the trump of God : and the dead in Christ 
shall rise first. Then ice which are left and remain shall be 
caught up together icith them in the clouds, to meet the Lord 
in the air ; and so shall we ever be with the Lord. 

20. This coining of the Lord, and the end of the world, was 
Eceles. known to the Preacher ; who says, Rejoice, O young man, in 

; lf ift thy youth, and in what follows ; Therefore remove anger from 

V 1 v 

Marg. thy heart, and jmt away evil from thy flesh ; . . . and re- 

1 b rM * ui&nber thy Creator .... ichile the evil days come not, .... 

ver. 2. while the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars be not 

ver. 3. darkened, .... and those that look out of the windows be not 

ver. 6. darkened ; (covertly meaning the faculty of sight ;) or ever t/ie 

silver cord be loosed ; (he speaks of the assemblage of the 

stars, for their appearance is like silver;) and the flower of 



The resurrection of the dead. 195 



bruised; (thus veiling the mention of the golden 
for this flower is a well-known plant, having many ray -like 
leaves shooting out round it;) and they rise up at the voice " 

f/ic bird, and thwj see from the height, and terrors be in 
tht&gt; wry. What shall they see ? Then shall they see the Son t. 

in in cominy in the clouds of heaven; and they shall mourn 



tribe by tribe. And what shall come to pass when the Lord is 
come ? The almond tree shall blossom, and the grasshopper 
s/ia II fjrow in substance, and the briar shall be scattered 
abroad. And as the interpreters say, the blossoming almond 12, 5 
signifies the departure of winter; and our bodies shall after 
the winter blossom with a heavenly flower. And the grass- 
hojtper shall fjrow in substance, (that means the winged soul 
clothing itself with the body,) and the briar shall be scattered 
abroad, (that is, the transgressors who are like thorns shall 
be scattered.) 

21. Thou seest how they all anticipate the coming of the 
Lord. Thou seest how they know the voice of the bird. Let Eccles. 
us know what sort of voice this is. For the Lord Himself ^ 



shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of thei&gt; ic. 

Archanyel, and with the trump of God. The Archangel shall 

shout aloud and say to all, Rise to meet the Lord. And fear 

ful will be that descent of our Master. David says, Our GodPs.50,3. 

shall come and shall not keep silence; afire shall devour before 

Him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about Him, and 

the rest. The Son of Man shall come to the Father, accord- Dan. 7, 

ing to the text, with the clouds of heaven, and with a stream 

of fire, which is to try men h , following as His train. Then if l Cor. 3, 

any man s works are of gold, he shall be made brighter; if any 



17 



man s course of life be like stubble, and without substance, he i 

shall be burned by the fire. And the Father shall sit, having 

His ij innent white as snow, and the hair of His head like the Dan. 7, 



pure wool. And this is spoken after the manner of men ; 
wherefore ? Because He is the King of those who are not 
defiled with sins; for, lie says, your sins shall be as while rtsls.1,18. 
snoiv, and shall be as wool, which is the emblem of the for 
giveness of sins, or of siulessness itself. But the same Lord 



11 ^ox.ip.a.ffrtKou. This i- :i common tuiv. Vid. Ambrose, (in Ps. 37, 14.) 

Gn.vk opinion, that the tin- of the last Hilary, (in Mutth. 2. . 4.) e. 
Judgment will ho pnr-zatoriul in its na 

il -2 



1 90* The C/Y .V.y the sif/n (/ th&lt; J .SVv// uf !\l&lt;t/l in 

LBCT. shall come from heaven in the clouds, who ascended in the 
, clouds ; for He Himself hath said, And they shall see the Son 

1*1 St. * T j 

2o. of Man coining in the clouds qf heaven, with power and great 

glory. 

(10.) 22. But what is the sign of His coming? lest the hostile 
Mat. 24, power dare to counterfeit it. Ami there shall appear, He says, 
the sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But Christ s own true 
v. supra sign is the Cross ; a ign of a luminous Cross shall go before 
41. the King, plainly declaring Him who was formerly crucified: 
Zedi.12.that the Jews who before pierced Him and plotted against 
Him, when they see it, may mourn tribe by tribe, saying, "This 



ver. 



Sept. is He who was smitten, this is He whose face they spat on, 
this is He on whom they put chains, this is He whom of old 
they crucified, and set at nought; whither, they will say, 
sliall we flee from the face of His wrath ?" But the Angel 
hosts shall encompass them, so that they shall not be able to 
flee any where. The Sign of the* Cross shall be a terror to 
His foes; but joy to His friends who have believed in Him, 
or preached Him, or suffered for His sake. Who then is that 
blessed man, who shall be found the friend of Christ ? That 
King, so great and glorious, attended by trains of Angels, the 
fellow of the Father s throne, will not despise His own servants. 

Mat. 24, For lest His Elect be confused with His foes, He shall send 
31 

His Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall 

gather together His elect from the four winds. He despised 
not one, even Lot ; how then shall He despise many righ 
teous ? Come, ye blessed of My Father, will He say to them 
who shall then ride on chariots of clouds, and be collected 
by Angels. 

23. But some one present will say, " I am a poor man, or 

again, I shall perhaps be found at that time sick and in bed ;" 

or, " I am but a woman, and I shall be taken at the mill : shall 

we then be despised ?" Be of good courage, O man ; the Judge is 

is.l 1 ,3. no respecter of persons ; He will not judge according to a mail s 

Sept appearance, nor reprove according to his speech. He honours 

not die learned before the simple, nor the rich before the needy. 

Though thou be in the field, the Angels shall take thee ; think 

not that He will take the landlord, and will leave thee the farmer. 

Though thou be a slave, though thou be poor, be not any whit 

Phil. 2, distressed ; He who took the form of a servant despises not 

/ * 



&gt;/ &gt; iijtfi tt&lt;ii&gt;tixin recorded against the day of judgment. lt)7 



Though thou be laid sick upon thy bed, yet it is 
written, Then shall (in) be in one bed; the one shall be token, 

O A 

&gt;tt tin other left. Though thou be of necessity put to v / Judgt 
grind, whether thou be man or woman; though thou have 16, 21. 
children, and sit beside the mill, yet He who by His migkt\\ t5 
hrunicth out them that arc bound, overlooks thee not He who Sep 1 - 

p,, Q 

brought forth Joseph out of ward and bondage to a kingdom, Se p t 
redeems thee also from thy afflictions into the kingdom of 
heaven. Only be of good cheer, only work, only strive cheer 
fully ; for nothing is lost. Every prayer of thine, every v. Acts 
Psalm thou singest is recorded ; every alms-deed, every fast 
is recorded ; every marriage duly observed is recorded ; con- \ 
tinence kept for God s sake is recorded; but the first crowns 
in record are those of virginity and purity; and thou shalthood. 
shine as an Angel. But as thou hast gladly listened to the 
good things, listen without shrinking to the contrary. Every 
covetous deed of thine is recorded ; every act of fornication 
is recorded against thee, every false oath of thine is recorded, 
every blasphemy, every sorcery, every theft, every murder. All 
these things are henceforth recorded, if thou do them after 
having been baptized ; for thy former deeds are blotted out. 

24. When the Son ofman y He says, shall come in His glory &gt; (\\\ 
and all the Angels with Him. Behold, O man, before what Mat. 25, 
multitudes thou shalt come to judgment. The whole race of? 1 " 

* ay 101 

men will then be present. Reckon, therefore, the numbers of A 
the Roman nation ; reckon the numbers of all the barbarian ** 

rcC 

tribes now living, and of those who have died within the last 
hundred years ; reckon how many nations have been buried 
during the last thousand years ; reckon all from Adam to this 
day. Great indeed is the multitude ; but yet it is little, for 
the Angels are many more. They are the ninety and nine\. Mat. 
sh* i i&gt;, but mankind is the single one. For according to the 
extent of universal space, must we reckon the number of its 
inhabitants. The whole earth is but as a point in the midst 
of this one heaven ; and the heaven which encircles it con- 
*ains as great a multitude of inhabitants as it has extent. 
And the heaven of heavens contains unimaginable numbers. 
And it is written, Thousand thousand* ministered unto JEf/y/?,Dau. 7, 
ft/id (&lt;&gt;n thousand limes tr-n thousand stood before Him ; not 10 
that the multitude was only so great, but the Prophet could 



198 The last judgment, 

LECT. not express more than these. And then will be present at 
the judgment, God, the Father of all, Jesus Christ being 
seated with Him, and the Holy Ghost being with Them ; 
and the angelic trumpet shall summon all of us, bearing our 
deeds. Ought we not then now to be sore troubled at this ? 
Think it not a slight doom, O man, putting punishment apart, 
to be condemned in the presence of so many. Shall we not 
then choose rather to die many deaths, than be condemned by 
friends ? 

(12.) 25. Let us shudder then, brethren, lest God condemn us; 
who needs not enquiry or proofs, to condemn. Say not, in 
the night I committed fornication, or wrought sorcery, or did 
any other thing, and there w r as no man by. Out of thine own 

Rom. 2, conscience shalt thou be judged, thy thoughts the mean 

icliile accusing or else excusing, in the day ichcn God shall 

judge the secrets of men. The terrible countenance of the 

Judge will force thee to speak the truth; or rather, even 

though thou speak not, it will convict thee. For thou shalt 

rise clothed with thy own sins, or else thy righteousnesses. 

And this has the Judge Himself declared, saying, (for it is 

Johns, Christ who judges,/or the Father judgeth no man, but hath 
committed all judgment unto the Son, not divesting Himself 
of His power, but judging through the Son; therefore the 
Son judgeth by the will of the Father; for the wills of the 

22 - Father and of the Son are not different, but one and the 
same ;) what then says the Judge, as to whether thou shalt 

v. Mat. bear thy works, or no ? And before Him shall they gather all 
j . a2 * nations: (for in the presence of Christ every knee must bow, 

10. of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the 
earth:} and He shall separate them one from another, as a 
shepherd divideth liis sheep from the goats. How does the 
shepherd make the separation ? Does he examine out of a book 
which is a sheep and which a goat? or does he distinguish 
by their plain marks ? Does not the wool shew the sheep, 
and the hairy and rough skin the goat ? In like manner, if 
thou hast now been cleansed from thy sins, thy deeds shall be 
henceforth as pure wool; and thy robe shall remain uii- 

Cant. 5, stained, and thou shalt even say, I hare put o/f my coat, how 
shall I put it on? By thy vesture shalt thou be known for a 
-sheep. But if thou be found hairy, like Esau, who was rough 



How to prepare for the last judgment. 109 

with hair, and wicked in mind, who for food lost his birth 
right and sold his privilege, thou shalt be among tliose on 
the left hand. 13ut God forbid that any here present should 
he an outcast from grace, or for his evil deeds be found on the 
left hand among the ranks of the sinners ! 

20. Terrible in good truth is the judgment, and terrible is (13.) 
the news of it. The kingdom of heaven is before us, and 
everlasting fire is made ready. How then, some one will say, 
should we escape the fire? And how should we enter into 
the kingdom? I teas an hung red, He says, and ye gave me Mat. 25, 
meat. Learn now the way; there is here no need of allegory, 
but to fulfil what is said. / teas an hunyrcd, and ye gave 
me meat; I teas thirsty , and ye gave me drink; I was a 
ttr anger, and ye look me in; naked, and ye clot/ted me; I 
sick, and ye visiled me ; I was in prison, and ye came 
me. These things if thou do, thou shalt reign together 
with Him; but if thou do them not, thou shalt be condemned. 
At once then begin to work these things, and abide in the 
faith ; lest, like the foolish virgins, tarrying to buy oil, thou 
be shut out. l&gt;e not confident because thou merely possessest 
the lamp, but constantly keep it burning. Let the light of 
thy good works shine before men, and let not Christ be 
blasphemed on thy account. Wear thou the garment of iii- 
corruption , resplendent with good works ; and that which 
thou hast received from God to dispense as a steward, dis 
pense thou profitably. Hast thou been put in trust with 
riches? Dispense them well. Hast thou been entrusted with 
the word of teaching? Ifc a good steward thereof. Canst 
thou bring over to the Church the souls of the hearers? Do 
this diligently. There are many doors of good stewardship. 
Only let none of us be condemned and cast out; so we may 
with boldness meet Christ the Everlasting King, who reigns 
for ever. For He reigns for ever, who having died for quick 
and dead, shall be judge of quick and dead. And as also 
Paul says, l-\&gt;r to this end Christ both died and rose and "Rom. 
reciccd, tli&lt;i! He migltl be Lord boih of the dead and living. 14 9 

"27. And shouldest thou ever hear any say that the kingdom (14.) 
of Christ shall ha\e an i nd, abhor thou the heresy; it is 
another head of the dragon, lately sprung up in Galatia. 

1 Viil. Greg. N:i/. Orat. 42. n. 2(5. Const. Apott viii. 6. 



- 00 r///7s/ J A- kindom is tnt/ii end, 



- A certain une k has dared to affirm, that after the end of the 

- world Christ shall reign no longer ; and he has dared to say, 
that the Word which came forth from the Father shall be 

ilt *uT e t - a g a i n absorbed into the Father, and shall be no more ; utter- 

pa, aval,- 

ing such blasphemies to his own perdition. For he has not 



John 8, listened to the Lord, saving. The Son abideth for ever. He 

/ fjs 

Luke 1 ^ as no ^ listened to Gabriel, saying, And He Khali reign over 

33. the house of Jacob for ever, and of His kingdom there shall be 

no end. Consider this text. Heretics of this day teach in 

disparagement of Christ, while Gabriel the Archangel taught 

the eternal abiding of the Saviour ; whom then wilt thou 

rather believe ? wilt thou not rather give credence to Gabriel? 

*****- Listen to the testimony of Daniel in the text; 1 sate in the 

QVffC&V . 

Dan. 7, night visions, and behold, one like the Son of Man came with 
13. 14. jj ie C i om i 8 qfhearen, and came to the Ancient of days ...... 

and there was gicen Him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, 
Unit all people, nations, and languages should serve Him; and 
His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass 
(iH tty, and His kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. 
Hold fast this in preference, these things believe, and cast 
away the words of heresy; for thou hast heard most explicitly 
concerning the endless kingdom of Christ. 

28, Thou hast the like doctrine in the interpretation of the 

Dan. 2, Stone, tchich was cut out of the mountain without hands. 
15 

which is Christ according to the flesh ; And [His] kingdom 

shall not be left to other people. And David says in one 

Ps.45,6. place, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever ; and in 

Ps. 102, another place, Tltoii, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the 

foundation of the earth, and the hearcns are the work of Thy 

hands; and then, they shall perish, but Thou remainest; and 

lieb. i, what follows; but Thou art the same, and Thy years shall 

\Q _ 12 . 9 

not fail. Which words Paul has interpreted of the Son. 

29. And wouldest thou know, how they who teach the 
contrary arrived at such madness ? They read wrongly that 

1 Cor. good word of the Apostle, For He must reign, till He hath 

5 25 - put all enemies under His feet; and they say, when His 

enemies shall have been put under His feet, He shall cease 

to reign, wrongly and foolishly alleging this. For He who 

is king before He has subdued His enemies, how shall He 

k This was Marcellus, Bishop of Ancyra, Socr. Hist. ii. 19. p. 99. 



In tr/tftl ,svvw Christ in snhject to the Vat I, 201 

not the rather be king, after He has gotten the mastery over 

thrill . 

30. They have also dared to say that the Scripture, When (15.) 
all Ihiiiiis Khali be subdued unto Him. then shall the Son also\ Cor. 

ic Oft 

Himself be subject unto Him that put all things under Him, 
that this Scripture shews that the Son shall be absorbed into 
the Father. Shall ye then, O most impious of all men, ye 
thf creatures of Christ, continue ? and shall Christ, by whom 
ii you and all things were made, perish ? Such a word is 
blasphemous. But further, how shall all things be made subject 
unto Him? Shall they perish, or continue? Shall then the 
other things, when subject to the Son, abide, and shall the 
Son, when subject to the Father, not abide? For He shall 
be subject, not because He shall then begin to be accordant 
to the Father, (for He doth always those things that p 
Him,) but because, then as before, He obeys the Father, 29. 
yielding, not a forced obedience, but a self-chosen accord- 
ance; for He is not a servant, that He should be subject by 
force, but a Son, that He should comply of His free choice 
and natural love. 
31. But let us examine them; what is the meaning 

1 until" or " as far as ?" For with this very word will I close 
with them, and try to expose their error. Since they have 
dared to say that the words, till He hath put His enemies 
under J It* feet, shew that He Himself shall have an end, and 
have presumed to set bounds to the eternal kingdom of Christ, 
and to bring to an end, as far as words go, His never-ending 
sovereignty, come now, let us read the like expressions in 
the Apostle: Nevertheless^ death reigned from Adam tillRom. 5, 
3/asv.v. Did men then die up to this time, and did none 
die any more alter Moses, or after the Law was there no more 
death among men ? Well then, thou seest that the word 

unto," is not to limit time ; but that Paul rather signified 
this, " And yet, though Moses was a righteous and wondrous 
man, the doom of death which was sent forth against Adam, 
lied even unto him, and them that came after him; and 
this, though they had not sinned like Adam, in the disobe 
dience concerning the eating of the Tree." 

: &gt;~. Take again another similar phrase. For until ////.v rA///2Cor.[3, 
... icht H Moses &gt;v rend, lite rail /\ upou their heart. Does 



202 Exhortation and blessiny. 

LECT. " until this day" mean only " until Paul ? v Is it not " until 
xv - this day" present, and even to the end ? And if Paul say to 

2 Cor. the Corinthians, For we are come as far as unto yon also 

15* 16 * n P rc(lc hiny tf ie Gospel of Christ, hariny hope to preach 
the Gospel in the regions beyond you, thou seest manifestly 
that " as far as" implies not the end, but has something 
following it. In what sense then shouldest thou remember 

l Cor. to take that Scripture, till He hath put all enemies under 
5 His feet ? According as Paul says in another place, Rut 

13. exhort each other daily, while it is called to-day ; meaning, 

v. Ileb. " continually." For as we may not speak of the " beginning 
of the days" of Christ, so neither endure thou any one who at 
any time speaks of the end of His kingdom. For it is written, 

Dan. 7, His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom. 

33. And though I have many more texts out of the divine 
Scriptures, that the kingdom of Christ has no end ever, I 
will be content with those above alleged, because of the 
(16.) advance of the day. But thou, O hearer, worship Him only 
as thy King, fleeing all heretical error. And if the grace of 
God permit us, the remaining Articles also of the Faith shall 
be in good time declared to you. And may the God of all 
keep you all, as ye bear in mind the signs of the end, and re 
main unsubdued by Antichrist. Thou hast received the tokens 
of that Deceiver who is to come; thou hast received the 
proofs of the true Christ, who shall openly come down from 
heaven. Fly therefore the one, the False one ; and look for 
the other, the True. Thou hast learnt the way, how in the 
judgment thou mayest be found among the company on the 

l Tim. right hand; guard that ivhich is committed to thee concerning 

fa &lt;}f t 

Christ, and be conspicuous in good works, that thou mayest 
stand with a good confidence before the Judge, and inherit 
the kingdom of heaven : Through whom, and with whom, 
be glory to God with the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever. 
Amen. 



LECTURE XVI. 



THE ONE HOLY GHOST, THE COMFORTER, WHICH SPAKE IN 

THE PROPHETS. 



1 COR. xii. 1, 4. 

Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have 
you ignorant. . . . Now there are diversities of gifts, but the 
Spirit. 



1. NEED have we truly of spiritual grace, that we may 
discourse concerning the Holy Spirit; not that we may 
speak suitably to His dignity, for this is impossible, but that 
in alleging the words of the divine Scriptures, we may not 
put ourselves in jeopardy. For surely a very fearful thing is 
written in the Gospels, where Christ says plainly, JVhosoeverMzi.lv, 

&gt;tk&lt;&gt;th a word against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be 2 * 
forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to 
conic. And there is often fear, lest a man, either from igno 
rance, or from what is considered religion, speaking what he 
ought not concerning Him, should receive this doom. The 
Judge o( quick and dead, Jesus Christ, has declared that he 
hath no forgiveness ; if then any man stumble, what hope 
has lie ? 

-2. To Jesus Christ s very grace, therefore, it must belong to 
grant both to us to speak without deficiency, and to you to 
In -ar with discretion; for discretion is needful not to them 
only wh( speak, but also to them that hear, lest they 
hear one thing, and receive a different impression. Let us 
then speak nothing concerning the Holy Ghost but what is 
written ; and if any thing be not written, let us not busy our- 

Ives about it. The Holy Ghost Himself spake the Scrip- 



204 There is but One Holy Ghost. 

lures ; He has also spoken concerning Himself as much as 
He pleased, or as much as we could receive. Be those 
things therefore spoken, which He has said ; for whatsoever 
He has not said, we dare not say. 

3. There is One Only Holy Ghost, the Comforter ; and as 
there is One God the Father, and no second Father ; and as 
there is One Only -begotten Son and Word of God, who hath 
no brother; so is there One Only Holy Ghost, and no 
second spirit equal in honour to Him. The Holy Ghost 
then is Power most mighty, of a divine and unsearchable 
nature ; for He is a living, and intelligent Being, and is the 
sanctifying principle of all things made by God through 
Christ. He it is who illuminates the souls of the just ; He 
was in the Prophets, He was also in the Apostles ir the New 
Testament. Abhorred be they who dare to separate into 
parts the active power of the Holy Ghost ! There is 
One God, the Father, Lord of the Old and of the New 
Testament; and One Lord, Jesus Christ, who was prophesied 
of in the Old Testament, and came in the New ; and One Holy 
Ghost, who through the Prophets preached of Christ, and when 
Christ was come, descended, and manifested Him. 

4. Let 110 one then divide the Old from the New Testa 
ment*; let no one say that the Spirit in the former is one, 
and in the latter another ; for thus he offends against the 
Holy Ghost Himself, who together with the Father and the 
Son is honoured, and at the observance of Holy Baptism is 
included with them in the Holy Trinity. For the Only- 
Mat. 28, begotten Son of God said plainly to the Apostles, Go ye, and 

teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Our hope is in the 
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. We preach not 
three Gods; let the Marcionites be mute; but we preach One 
God, by One Son, with the Holy Ghost. The Faith is indi- 

. visible ; religious worship is undistracted. We neither divide 
the Holy Trinity, like some ; nor do we as Sabellius introduce 

- confusion. But we know according to godliness One Father, 
who sent His Son to be our Saviour ; we know One Son, who 
promised that He would send the Comforter from the Father; 
we know the Holy Ghost, who spake in the Prophets, and 

* As did the Gnostics and Manichees. Philast. Hser. 126. 



tftticerning th&lt;&gt; Holy ufumi ,- th" Ghtosdcs. 205 

who on the day of Pentecost descended on the Apostles in 
the form of fiery tongues, here, in Jerusalem, in the Upper 
Church of the Apostles 5 ; for all the choicest privileges 
belong to us. Here Christ came down from heaven; here 
the Holy Ghost came down from heaven. And in truth it 
were most fitting, that as we discourse concerning Christ and 
Golgotha, upon this Golgotha, so also we should speak con 
cerning the Holy Ghost in the Upper Church ; yet since He 
who descended there jointly partakes of the glory of Him 
who was crucified here, we here speak concerning Him also 
who descended there : for religious worship is indivisible. 

5. We would now say somewhat concerning the Holy (3.) 
Ghost; not to declare with exactness His substance, for this^* 
were impossible ; but to speak of the diverse mistakes of some 
concerning Him, (lest we unawares fall upon them ;) and to 
block up the paths of error, that we may journey on the 
King s one highway. And if we now for caution s sake repeat 

any of the statements of these heresies, let it recoil on their 
heads, and let us be guiltless, both we who speak, and ye 
who hear. 

6. For the heretics, who are most profane in all things, 

have sharpened their tongue against the Holy Ghost also, Ps. no, 
and have dared to utter atrocious things ; as Irenaeus the 
teacher has written in his directions against heresies. For 
some of them have dared to say that they were the Holy 
Ghost ; of whom the first was Simon, the sorcerer spoken of 
in the Acts of the Apostles : for when he was cast out, he 
presumed to teach such doctrines ; and they who are called 
Gnostics, impious men, have spoken other things against the 
Spirit, and the abandoned Valentinians again something else ; 
and the profane Manes dared to call himself the Comforter 
; sent by Christ. Others again have taught that the Spirit is 
different in the Prophets and in the New Testament. Great 
then is their error, or rather their blasphemy. Abhor there 
fore such, and flee from them who blaspheme the Holy Ghost, 
and have no forgiveness. For what fellowship hastthou with 
the desperate, thou, who art to be baptized now, and into the 
Holy Ghost also ? If he who attaches himself to a thief and 

b On Mount Sion, and divided into vid. Epiphan. de Mens. 14. 
two part?, the Upper and the Lower. 



206 Marcioniste, Montanists, Manic/ices. 

LECT. concurs with him, is punishable, what hope shall he have. 

who offends against the Holy Ghost ? 

7. And abhor the Marcionists also, who tear away from the 
New Testament the text of the Old. For Marcion first, that 
most impious of men, who first asserted three Gods, knowing 
that in the New Testament are contained testimonies con 
cerning Christ from the Prophets, cut out those taken from 
the Old Testament, that the King might be left without wit 
ness. Abhor those above-mentioned Gnostics, men of know 
ledge by name, but fraught with ignorance ; who have dared 
to say such things of the Holy Ghost, as I dare not repeat. 
(4.) 8. Let the Cataphrygians also be thy abhorrence, andMon- 
tanus, their ringleader in evil, and his two so-called prophet 
esses, Maximilla and Priscilla. For this Montanus, who 
was out of his mind and really mad, (for he would not have 
said such things, had he not been mad,) dared to say that he : 
was the Holy Ghost, he, miserable man, and fdled with all 
uncleanness and lasciviousness c ; for it suffices but to hint at 
this, out of respect for the women who are present. And 
having fixed his abode at Pepuza, a most insignificant 
hamlet of Phrygia, he falsely named it Jerusalem ; cutting the 
throats of wretched little children, and chopping them up 
into horrid food, for the purposes of their so-called mysteries,- 
(wherefore till but lately in the time of persecution, we were 
suspected of doing this, because these Montanists were called, 
falsely indeed, by the common name of Christians ;) yet lie 
dared to call himself the Holy Ghost, filled as he was with 
all impiety and savage cruelty, and condemned by a sentence 
beyond mitigation. 

9. And he was seconded, as was said before, by that most 
impious Manes also, who blended together what was bad 
in every heresy; who being the very lowest pit of destruc 
tion, collected the doctrines of all the heretics, and wrought 
out and set forth a yet more novel error. And he dared to 
say that he himself was the Comforter, whom Christ pro 
mised to send. But the Saviour when He promised Him&gt; 

Luke24,said to the Apostles, But tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem^ 
until ye be endued with power from on high. What then ? 

e These charges against the Monta- other writers, 
nists are not satisfactorily borne out by 



The duty of haling heretics. 207 

did the Apostles who had been dead two hundred years, wait 
lor .Manes, until they should be endued with power ; and 
will any dare to say, that they were not from that time full of 
the llolv Ghost? And in truth it is written, Then they laid Acts 8, 

IT 

/Kinds on them, and they received the Holy Ghost ; was 



not this before Manes, yea, many years ago, when the Holy 
Ghost descended on the day of Pentecost? 

10. Wherefore was Simon the sorcerer condemned? Was 

it not that he came to the Apostles, and said, Give me also Acts 8, 
this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive 
the Holy Ghost ? For he said not, " Give me also the fellow 
ship of the Holy Ghost," but " Give me the power ;" that he 
might sell to others that which might not be sold, of which he 
had not himself possession. And he brought money to them 
who had nothing ; and this, seeing men bringing the prices of 
the things sold, and laying them at the Apostles feet. And 
he considered not that they who trod under foot the wealth 
which was brought for the maintenance of the poor, were not 
likely to give the power of the Holy Ghost for a bribe. But 
what say they to Simon ? Thy money perish with thee, because Ib. v.2o. 
thnu hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased 
with money ; thou art a second Judas, who for money hast 
expected to buy the grace of the Spirit. If then Simon, who 
wished to get this power for a price, is to perish, how 
impious is Manes, who said that he was the Holy Ghost ? 
Let us hate them who are worthy of hatred; withdraw we 
from them whom God withdraws from; let us also say unto 
God with all boldness concerning all heretics, Do not I hate Ps. 139, 
them, O Lord, that hate Thee, and am not I grieved with 
(li: in tin it rise up against Thee? For there is also an enmity 
which is right, according as it is written, / will put enmity Gen. 3, 
f&gt;&lt; (trt f&gt;/t t/i&lt; L and her seed; for friendship with the serpent 
works enmity with God, and death. 

11. Let then thus much suffice concerning those outcasts; (5.) 
and now let us return to the divine Scriptures, and let us 
////// -in tiers out of our own cisterns, (that is, the holy p rov . 5, 
Fathers,) and running waters out of our own wells. Drink 15 
we of that living water, which springs up into everlasting j i m 4 

; but this spake the Saviour of the Spirit, which they that 1 *- , 

... *- 1) / y GO* 

oeneve on Him should receive. For observe what lie says, 39. 



208 The run/ruff gifl* of the Holy (thost. 

LECT. He that believeth on me, (not simply this, but,) as the 

- ture hath said, (thus He hath sent thee back to the Old 



Testament,) out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. 
i. rivers, not perceived by sense, and merely watering the earth 
with its thorns and trees, but bringing light to the soul. And 
in another place He says, But the water that I shall give. 
John 4, Mm, shall be in him a well of water springing up into ever 
lasting life, a new water, living and springing up, springing 
up to them who are worthy. 

12. And why has He called the grace of the Spirit by the 

name of water ? because by water all things subsist ; because 

of water are herbs and animals created; because the water of 

the showers comes down from heaven ; because it comes 

down one in form, yet manifold in its working. For one 

v. Gen. fountain watered the whole of the Garden, and one and the 

2&gt; J same rain comes down upon all the world, yet it becomes 

white in the lily, and red in the rose, and purple in the violets 

and pansies, and different and varied in each several kind: 

so it is one in the palm tree, and another in the vine, and all 

in all things ; being the while one in nature, not diverse from 

itself ; for the rain does not change, when it comes down, first 

as one thing, then as another, but adapting itself to the 

nature of each thing which receives it, it becomes to each 

what is suitable. Thus also the Holy Ghost, being one, and 

fiovatiYss. of one nature, and undivided, divides to each His grace, 

l Cor. according as He will : and as the dry tree, when it partakes of 

12, 11. wa ter, puts forth shoots, so also the soul in sin, when it has been 

through repentance made worthy of the Holy Ghost, brings 

forth clusters of righteousness. And He, being One in nature, 

nip.*, yet at the will of God and in the Name of Christ works many 

excellences. For He employs the tongue of one man for 

wisdom; the soul of another He enlightens by Prophecy; 

to another He gives power to drive away devils ; to another 

He gives to interpret the divine Scriptures. He invigorates 

one man s self-command ; He teaches another the way to give 

alms ; another He teaches to fast and exercise himself; an 

other He teaches to despise the things of the body ; another 

He trains for martyrdom: diverse in different men, yet not 

lCor.12, diverse from Himself, as it is written, But the manifestation 

7 ~~ n&gt; of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. For to 



Different .SYV/.SV.V /// tin: ircnt Spirit. 

is given by the Spirit the icord if wisdom ; to another 
the irnrd ff knoirl&lt;&gt;thje by the same Sjtirit ; to another Jaltli 
by the wiiie Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the 
&gt;//////; /// another the working of nnrarles; to another 
; to another, discern ing of spirits; to another, diverse 
kinds of tongues ; to another, the interpretation of tongues: 
but all these worketh the self-same Spirit, dividing to every 
mnn severally as He will. 

13. But since concerning that which is called Spirit, many (6.) 
and diverse things are written in the divine Scriptures, and 
there is reason to fear lest some out of ignorance fall into 
confusion, not knowing what sort of spirit is spoken of; it 

will be well now to certify you, of what kind the Scripture 
declares the Holy Spirit to be. For, as Aaron is called 
Christ, and David and Saul and others are called Christs, i.e. 
hut there is only one true Christ, so, since the name of the e( ]. v . 
Spirit is given to different things, it is right to see what is su P r -*- 
meant in particular by the Holy Spirit. For many things are 
called spirits. Thus an Angel is called spirit, and our soul is 
called spirit, and this wind which is blowing is called spirit ; 
and great excellence is spoken of as spirit ; and an unclean 
deed as spirit; and a devil our adversary is called spirit. Be 
ware therefore when thou nearest these things, lest from their 
having a common name thou mistake one for another. For 
concerning our soul the Scripture says, His spirit shall gops. 146, 
forth, and he shall return to his earth: and of the same soul 4 * 86 ? 1 

7 f*f*n 

it says again, Which formeth the spirit of man within him. 12, i". 
And of the Angels it is said in the Psalms, Who maketh His Pa. 104, 
Angels spirits, and His ministers a flaming fore. And of the p " 
wind it saith, Thou shall break the ships of Tarshish with al. Sept. 
violent spirit; and, As the tree in the wood is moved bv the** ^ 2&lt; 

Sept. 

tptrit ; and, Fire, hail, snow, ice, spirit of storm. And ofp s 143 
good doctrine the Lord Himself says, The words that I speak* 
ioi lo yoit, they are spirit, and they are life ; instead of, " ore GO 
spiritual." But the Holy Spirit is not pronounced by the 
tongue ; but He is Living, and He it is who gives to speak 
wisely, speaking and discoursing Himself. 

14. And wouldest thou know that He discourses and 
speaks ? Philip by revelation of an Angel went down to the 
way which leads to (Jaxn, when the Eunuch was coming; 



210 Instances of the Holy Ghost speaking. 

LECT. an d the Spirit said to Philip, Go near, and join thyself to this 
Act 8 cnar ^ ot Seest thou the Spirit talking to one who hears 
29. Him ? And Ezekiel speaks thus, And the Spirit of the Lord 
Ezek.ii.y^// i ( po n me, and said unto me, Speak; Thus saith the Lord. 

5. 

Acts 13, And again, The Holy Ghost said, unto the Apostles who were 
in Antioch, Separate me Barnabas and Said for the work 
whereunto I have called them. Beholdest thou the Spirit 
living, separating, calling, and with authority sending forth? 

Acts 20, So Paul said, Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every 

O Q 

city, saying that bonds and afflictions await me. For this 
the good Sanctifier of the Church, and her Helper, and 
Teacher, the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, of whom the Saviour 

John 14, said, He shall teach you all thijigs, (and He said not only, 
He shall teach, but, He shall bring to your remembrance 
whatsoever I have said unto you; for the teachings of Christ 
and of the Holy Ghost are not different, but the same;) He, 
I say, testified before to Paul what should befal him, that he 
might be the more stout-hearted, from knowing them pre 
viously. I have been led to make these remarks in con 
sequence of the text, The words which I speak unto you, 
they are spirit; that thou mayest understand this, not of the 
utterance of the lips, but of good doctrine. 

(7.) 15. In Scripture too sin also is called spirit, as I have 
already said ; but in another and opposite sense, as when it is 

Hos. 4, said, The spirit of whoredoms caused them to err. The name 
" spirit" is given also to the unclean spirit, the devil; but 
with the addition of, " unclean ;" for to each is joined its dis 
tinguishing name, to mark its proper nature. When the Scrip 
ture uses " spirit" in reference to the soul of man, it is with the 
addition, " of man ;" if it mean the wind, it says, the " spirit 
of storm ; if sin, it says, the " spirit of whoredoms ;" if the 
devil, it says, " an unclean spirit :" that we may know which 
particular thing is spoken of, and thou mayest not suppose that 
it means the Holy Ghost ; God forbid ! For this word spirit 
is common to many things ; and every thing which has not a 
gross body is in a general way called spirit. Since, therefore, 
the devils have not such bodies, they are called spirits : but 
great is the difference ; for the unclean devil, when he comes 
upon the soul of a man, (may the Lord deliver from him 
every soul that hoars me, yea, and that is away!) he comes 



Cnn trast between inspiration and demoniacal possession. 2 1 1 

like a uolf upon a sheep, ravening for blood, and ready to 
devour. Mis presence is most cruel; the sense of it most 
oppressive ; the mind is darkened : his attack is an injus 
tice also, and the usurpation of another s possession. For 
he tyrannically uses another s body, another s instruments, 
as his own property ; he throws down him who stands 
upright; (for he is akin to him who fell from heaven ;) he Luke 10, 
perverts the tongue and distorts the lips. Foam comes 
instead of words ; the man is filled with darkness ; his eye 
is open, yet the soul sees not through it ; and the miserable 
man quivers convulsively before his death. The devils are 
truly foes of men, using them basely and pitilessly. 

16. Such is not the Holy Ghost ; God forbid ! For His (8.) 
doings tend the contrary way, to what is good and salutary. 
First, 1 1 is coining is gentle ; the perception of Him is fragrant ; 
most light is His burden ; beams of light and knowledge 
gleam forth before His coming. He comes with the bowels 
of a true guardian ; for He comes to save, and to heal, to 
teach, to admonish, to strengthen, to exhort, to enlighten the 
mind, first of him who receives Him, and afterwards of others 
also, through him. And as a man, who having been pre 
viously in darkness, on a sudden beholds the sun, receives 
light in his bodily sight, and sees plainly things which he 
saw not, so in like manner he who is vouchsafed the 
Holy Ghost, is illuminated in his soul, and sees things 
beyond man s sight, which he knew not; his body is on 
earth, yet to his soul are mirrored forth the heavens. He 
sees, like Esaias, the Lord sitting upon a throne hiyh fin(li s .6,i, 
up; he sees, like Ezekiel, Him who is above 



Cherubim, ; he sees, like Daniel, thousand thousands, and Icn ! 
thousand times ten thousand; and the man, little though he 10. 

beholds the beginning of the world and the end of the 
world, and the times intervening, and the successions of kings,- 
thiugs which he had not learnt: for the True Knlightener is 
present with him. The man is within walls; but the power 
&lt;&gt;f his knowledge reaches far and wide, and he sees even 
what other men are doing. 

17. Peter \\as not with Ananias and Sapphira when they 
their possessions, but he was present by tin- Spirit; 

he says, fiafh Sn/r/it filled thine hi&gt;nrt in He in t]i&lt;&gt; Acts 5, 

,, o 3. 



212 Gift of supernatural knowledge through the Spirit. 

LECT. Holy Ghost / There was no accuser : there was no witness ; 
XVI. 

whence knew he what had happened ? Whiles it remained 
icas it not thine oven ? and after it was sold, was it not 
in thine own power ? why hast thou conceived this thing in 

Acts 4, thine heart ? The unlettered Peter, by the grace of the 

I ^ 

Spirit, learnt what not even the sages of the Greeks had 
known. Thou hast the like, in the case also of Elisseus. 
For when he had freely healed the leprosy of Xaaman, 
Gehazi received the reward, the reward of another s achieve 
ment; and took the money from Naaman, and bestowed it 
Ps. 139, in a dark place. But the darkness is no darkness to the 

12 

Saints. And when he came, Elisseus asked him ; and like 

Acts5,8. Peter, when he said, Tell me whether ye sold the land for so 
2 Kings much ? he also enquires, Whence comest thou, Gehazi? Not 

f O t 

in ignorance, but in sorrow ask I whence comest thou ? 
From darkness art thou come, and to darkness shalt thou go ; 
thou hast sold the cure of the leper, and the leprosy shall be 
thy heritage. I have fulfilled, he says, the bidding of Him 
Mat. 10, who said to me, Freely ye have received, freely give; but 

o 

thou hast sold this grace ; receive now the terms of thy 
purchase. But what says Elisseus to him ? Went not mine 
heart with thee ? \ was here shut in by the body, but the 
spirit which has been given me of God, saw even the things 
afar off, and shewed me plainly what was doing elsewhere. 
Thou seest how r the Holy Ghost not only rids of ignorance, 
(9.) but invests with knowledge ; thou seest how He illuminates 
souls. 

18. Esaias lived nearly a thousand years ago; and he 
Is. i, 8. beheld Sion as a cottage. The city was still standing, and 

beautified with public places, and robed in majesty ; yet he 
Mic. 3, says, Zion shall be ploughed as a field, foretelling what is 
12 * fulfilled in our days. And observe the exactness of the pro- 
Is, i, 8.P nec y j f r ne sa id, ^ na&gt; the daughter of Zion shall be left as 
a cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers. 
And now the place is filled with gardens of cucumbers. Seest 
thou how the Holy Spirit illuminates the holy ones ? Be not 
therefore carried away to other things, by the force of a 
common term, but keep fast what is exactly meant. 

19. And if ever, while thou hast been sitting here, thoughts 
concerning chastity or virginity have come into thy mind, it 



oly G I tost yives power over theflcsh, the world, and the devil. 2 1 3 

has been His teaching. 1 las riot often a maiden, already at 
tin- bridal threshold, fled away, lie teaching her the doctrine 
of virginity ? I fas not often a man high in court, spurned 
wealth and rank, being taught by the Holy Ghost? Has not 
often a young man, at the sight of beauty, closed his eyes, 
and fled from the sight, and escaped the defilement? Askest 
tliou, whence it came to pass ? The Holy Ghost taught the 
soul of the young man. Many ways of covetousness are 
there in the world; yet Christians refuse possessions: where 
fore? by the instigation of the Holy Ghost. Awful in 
truth is that Spirit, holy and good ; and fittingly are we 
baptized into Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. A man, 
still with a body about him, wrestles with many fiercest 
demons ; and often the demon, whom many men could not 
master with iron bands, has been mastered by him with 
words of prayer, through the power which is in him of the 
Holy Ghost; and the mere breathing of the Exorcist be 
comes as fire to that unseen foe. A mighty Succour and 
Protector, therefore, have we of God ; a great Teacher of the 
Church, a mighty Champion on our behalf. Let us not be 
afraid of the demons, nor of the devil ; for our Champion is 
mightier. Only let us open to Him our doors ; for He goes wisd. 6, 
about seeking such as are worthy, and searching on whom He 16a 
may confer His gifts. 

20. And He is called the Comforter, because He comforts (10.) 
us, and encourages us, and helpeth our infirmities ; for we R m. 8, 
know not what we should pray for as we ought ; but the^ 
Spirit itself maketh intercession for us, irith grnanings which 
fit/mot be uttered, that is, to God. Oftentimes, a man for 
Christ s sake has been outraged and injuriously dishonoured; 
martyrdom is at hand; tortures on every side, and fire, and 
sword, and savage beasts, and the deep pit. But the Holy 
(ihost softly whispers to him, " Wait thou for the Lord, 
O man ; what is now befalling thee is a small matter; that 
which is bestowed on thee is great. Suffer thou a little 
while, and be with Angels everlastingly; the sufferings of Rom. B, 
this i&gt;r&lt; xi nt time tn i* not worthy to be emu/wed n-ith //"&gt; 18&gt; 
jl &gt;t H wh irh xhull J&gt;e revec Ifii in us." He pouvtrays to the man 
the kingdom of heaven; lie almost shews him even the para 
dise of delight ; and the martyrs, whose bodily countenances 



214 Diversity of ojwrations of the Spirit in the Church Catholic. 

LECT. are of necessity turned to their judges., but who in spirit 
" , are already in Paradise, despise those hardships which are 

- 



&lt;TI\ dwva- 

seen. 



21. And wouldest thou be sure that through the power 
of the Holy Ghost the Martyrs bear their witness ? The 

Luke 12, Saviour says to His disciples, And when they briny you unto 
the synagogues, and unto magistrate*, and pincers, take ye 
no thought how ye sh"// answer, or what ye shall say ; for the 
Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour, what ye ought 
to say. For it is impossible to suffer martyrdom for Christ s 

!Cor.l2,sake, except a man suffer by the Holy Ghost ; for if no wan 
can say that Jesus is the Lord, hut by the Holy Ghost, how 
shall any man give his own life for Jesus 1 sake, but by the 
Holy Ghost ? 

(11.) 22. Great indeed, and all-powerful in gifts, and wonderful, 
is the Holy Ghost. Consider, how many of you are now 
sitting here, how many souls of us are present. For each He 
is working as is suitable, and being in the midst, He beholds 
the temper of each. He beholds also his thoughts and his con 
science, and what we say, and what we imagine. What I 
have now said is great indeed, yet is it small. For consider, 
I pray, with thoughts illuminated by Him, how many Chris- 
tians there are of this diocese, and how many in the whole 
province of Palestine, and carry forward thy mind from this 
province, to the whole Roman empire ; and after this, consider 
the whole world ; races of Persians, and nations of Indians, 
Goths and Sarmatians, Gauls and Spaniards, and Moors Li 
byans and Ethiopians, and the rest for whom we have no names; 
for of many of the nations not even the names have reached us. 
Consider, I pray, of each nation, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, 
Solitaries, Virgins, and other laity; and then behold the great 
Protector, and Dispenser of their gifts ; how throughout the 
world He gives to one chastity, to another perpetual virginity, 
to another almsgiving, to another voluntary poverty, to another 
power of repelling hostile spirits. And as the light with one 
gleam sheds radiance on all things, so also the Holy Ghost 
enlightens those who have eyes ; for if any from blindness is 
not vouchsafed His grace, let him not blame the Spirit, but 
his ow r n unbelief. 
(12.) 23. Thou hast seen His power, which is throughout the 



Operations of the Spirit in the Heavenly Host and in the Prophets. 215 

world ; tarry now no longer upon earth, but ascend on high. 
A si- end, I say, in imagination even unto the first heaven, and 
behold how many uncounted myriads of Angels are there. 
Kise up in thy thoughts, if thou canst, yet higher; do but con 
sider the Archangels, do but consider the Spirits ; consider 
the Virtues, consider the Principalities, consider the Powers, 
consider the Thrones, consider the Dominions; the Comforter 
is of all these the lluler from God, and the Teacher, and the 
Sunctifier. Of Him has Elias need, and Elisseus, and Esaias, 
among men ; of Him Michael and Gabriel have need among 
Angels. Nought of things created is equal in honour to Him: 
for the families of the Angels, and all their hosts assembled 
together, have no equality with the Holy Ghost. All these the 
all-excellent power of the Comforter overshadows. And they 
indeed are sent forth to minister ; but He searches even the 
deep things of God, according as the Apostle says, For ///elCor.2, 
Spirit searcheth all things, yea,, the deep things of God. For 
what man, knoiceth the things of a man, save the spirit of 
man trhich is in him ? even so the things of God knoweth no 
man, but the Spirit of God. 

24. He preached concerning Christ in the Prophets ; He 
wrought in the Apostles ; He to this day seals the souls in 
Baptism. And the Father indeed gives to the Son ; and the 
Son shares with the Holy Ghost. For it is Jesus Himself, 
not I, who says, All things arc delivered unto Me of My Mat. 11, 
Father; and of the Holy Ghost He says, IVheti He, 



Spirit of 7V/////, shall come, and the rest .... He shall glorify 13. 14. 
Me; for He shall receive of Mine, and shall shew it unto you. 
The Father through the Son, with the Holy Ghost, bestows 
all things ; the gifts of the Father are none other than those of 
the Son, and those of the Holy Ghost; for there is one Salva 
tion, one Power, one Faith; One God, the Father; One 
Lord, His only-begotten Son; One Holy Ghost, the Com 
forter. And it is enough for us to know these things; but 
enquire not curiously into His nature or substance : for had it * 
been written, we would have spoken of it; what is not written, 
let us not venture on ; for it is sufficient for our salvation to 
know, that there is Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost. 

25. This Spirit descended upon the seventy Elders in the (13.) 
days of Moses. (Now let not the length of the discourse? 



"2 16 The Holy Ghost yiven to some, but not to all, before Pentecost. 
LECT. beloved, produce weariness in you: but may He of whom 

XVI 

our discourse is, grant strength to every one, both to us who 



speak, and to you who listen !) This Spirit, us I said, came 

down upon the seventy Elders in the time of Moses ; and I 

say this to thee, that I may set before thee, that He knows 

i Cor. all things, and worketh as He will. The seventy Elders were 

12 11 

Numb, chosen; And the Lord came down in a cloud, and took of the 
24. Sjih it thai MW upon Moses, and gave it unto the seventy 



Elders; not that the Spirit was divided, but His grace, 
according to the vessels of it, and the capacity of the reci 
pients. But there were present sixty and eight, and they 
prophesied ; but Eldad and Medad were not present : there 
fore that it might be shewn that it was not Moses who 
bestowed the gift, but the Spirit who wrought, Eldad and 
Medad, who had been called, but had not as yet presented 
themselves, prophesy. 

26. Jesus the son of Nun, the successor of Moses, was 
ver. 28. amazed ; and coming to him he says, " Hast thou heard that 
Eldad and Medad prophesy ? They were called, and they 
came not; my lord Moses, forbid them." " I cannot forbid 
them," he says, " for this grace is from heaven ; nay, so far 
am I from forbidding them, that I even think it a mercy. I 
think not, however, that thou hast said this in envy ; yet hast 
v. 29. thou not rivalry /or my sake, because that they prophesy, and 
v. Sept. Lhou prophesiest not yet ? wait for the proper season ; and O 
Sept. that all the Lord s people were prophets, whenever the Lord 
shall put His Spirit upon them /" saying this also prophe 
tically, Whenever Hie Lord sit all put ; " However He has 
not as yet given it; so thou hast it not yet." Had riot then 
Abraham this, and Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph ? And they 
of old, had they it not ? Nay, but the words plainly mean, 
" trhe)i He shall put it upon all ; as yet indeed this grace 
is partial, then it shall be given lavishly." And he secretly 
alluded to what was to happen on the day of Pentecost 
among us ; for He descended among us, yet He had before 
Deut. also descended upon many. For it is written, And Jesus the 
son ofXuH was full of the Spirit of wisdom ; for Moses had 
laid his hands upon him. Thou seest the same figure in the 
Old and New Testaments ; in the days of Moses, the Spirit 
was given by the laying on of hands ; and Peter also gives 



The Holy (i/Kixt iff 1.1 U th&lt;&gt;j ti*t, in nil Prophets. 217 

UK- Spirit by the laying on of hands. And on thee also, who 
art about to be baptized, shall His grace come ; yet in what 
manner I say not, for 1 will not anticipate the proper season. 
-27. He also came upon all the just, and the Prophets ; 
Enos, I mean, and Enoch, and Noah, and the rest ; upon 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob ; for as regards Joseph, even Pharaoh v . Gen. 
understood that he had the Spirit of God within him. And 41 38 
of Moses, and the wonderful works wrought by the Spirit in 
his days, thou hast heard often. This Spirit had Job, that 
most enduring man, and all the saints, though we repeat not 
all their names. He also was sent when the tabernacle was Exod. 
in making, and filled with wisdom the wise-hearted men who * 



were with Bezaleel. l.&c. 

28. In the might of this Spirit, as we have it in the Book of Judg. 3, 
Judges, Othniel judged; Gideon was made strong; Jephtha lb&gt; 6 34i&gt; 
conquered; Deborah, a woman, waged war; and Samson, l b - n. 
so long as he wrought righteousness, and grieved Him not, " 
achieved things beyond man s power. And as for Samuel 

and David, we have it plainly in the Books of Kings, that by 
the Holy Ghost they prophesied, and were the chiefs of the 
prophets ; and Samuel was called, the Seer ; and David says i Sam.9, 
distinctly, The Spirit of the Lord spake by me, and in the 2 
Psalms, And take not thy Holy Spirit from me, and again, 23, 2. 
Let thy good Spirit lead me forth into the land of righteous- n s&lt; lf 
)icss. And as we have it in the Books of Chronicles, Azariah, Ps - 143 
in the time of King Asa, and Jahaziel in the time of King B. vers!) 
Jehoshaphat, partook of the Holy Ghost ; and again, another 2 r chron 
Azariah, he who was stoned. And Ezra says, Thou gavestib .2Q, 
also Thy good Spirit to instruct them. But as touching Elias 1 .*,* , 

V IQ , ^ &gt; 

who was taken up, and Elisseus, those spirit-instinct d and 20. 21. 
wonder-working men, it is manifest, without our saying so,. 20* 
that they were full of the Holy Ghost. 

29. And if a man peruse all the books of the Prophets, 
both of the twelve, and of the others, many will he find the 
U-xts to be concerning the Holy Ghost; as when Micah says 

in the person of God, Unless L fulfil might by the Spirit o/*Mic.3,8. 
tlif Lord ; and Joel cries, And it shall come to pass after- ^P 1 - 

Joel 2, 
28. 
d #*tvfuira(f&gt;e&lt;uv. " Used in a had to holy men hy ecclesiastical writers." 

belonging to false prophets, in Ed. Ben. 
Hos. 9, 7. Zeph. 3, 4. Sept. but applied 



J18 Texts from the Old Testament concerning the Holy Spirit. 

LECT. wards, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh ; and 
Y ^- Haggai, For I am with you, saith the Lord of Hosts ; My 
4. 5. Spirit remaineth among you ; and in like manner Zechariah, 
Zech. i, But receive My words and My statutes which I command by 

ept My Spirit, to My servants the Prophets ; and the rest. 

Is. 11,2. 30. And Esaias too, with his majestic voice, says, And the 

Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon Him, the spirit of wisdom 

and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit 

qf knowledge and godliness; and the fear of the Lord shall Jill 

Him ; signifying that the Spirit is one and undivided, but 

Is. 42,1. His operations various. So again, Behold My servant, and 

Is. 44,3. the rest; / have put My Spirit upon Him. And again, 

lb. 48, / will pour My Spirit upon thy seed ; and again, And now 

Ib.*59, the Lord God and His Spirit hath sent Me ; and again, This 

21 - is My covenant with them, saith the Lord, My Spirit which 

Ib.6i,i. & upon thee ; and again, The Spirit of the Lord God is 

upon Me, because He hath anointed Me, and the rest ; and 

lb. 63, again in his charge against the Jews, But they rebelled and 

v. ii. ^exed His Holy Spirit, and, where is He that put His Holy 

Spirit within Him ? Also thou hast in Ezekiel, (if thou be 

not now weary of listening,) what has already been quoted, 

Ezek. And the Spirit of the Lord fell upon me, and said unto me, 

Speak ; Thus saith the Lord. But the words, fell upon me, 

we must understand in a good sense, that is, "lovingly;" as 

y. Gen. Jacob also, when he had found Joseph, fell upon his neck ; 

and as the loving father, in the Gospels, on seeing his son 

Luke 15, who had returned from his wandering, had compassion, and 

ran and fell on his neck, and kissed him. And again in 

Ezek. Ezekiel, And he brought me in a vision by the Spirit of God 

into Chaldcea, to them of the captivity. And other texts thou 

vid. sup. heardest before, in what was said about Baptism ; Then will 

f^ * 

16. / sprinkle clean water upon you, and the rest; a new heart 

Ezek.36, also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put icithin you ; 

~ 27 and then immediately, And I will put my Spirit u-ithin you. 

Ezek. And again, The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried 

me out in the Spirit of the Lord. 

(16.) 31. He endued with wisdom the soul of Daniel, that 

Susanna young as he was he should be judge of Elders. The chaste 

13, 22. Susanna was condemned as a wanton ; there was none to 

plead her cause; for who should deliver her from the rulers? 



The gifts of the Spirit in Daniel. 219 

She was led away to death, she was now in the hands of the 
.rutioiKTs. But her Helper was at hand, the Comforter, 
ili e Spirit who sanctifies every intelligent nature. Come 
hither to me, He says to Daniel; young though thou be, 
convict those elders who labour under the sins of youth ; for 
it is written, God raised up the Holy Spirit upon a young v. 45. 
sfrijiling; in a word, (to cut the subject short,) by the 
Mteuce of Daniel that chaste lady was saved. We bring 
this forward as an instance ; for this is not the season for 
expounding. Nebuchadnezzar also knew that the Holy 
Spirit was in Daniel ; for he says to him, O Belteshazzar, Dan. 4, 
waster of the magicians, because I know that the Spirit of 
the Holy Gods is in thee. One thing he said truly, and one 
falsely ; for that he had the Holy Spirit was true, but he was 
not the master of t/ie magicians, for he was no sorcerer, p*ys. 
but was wise through the Holy Ghost. And before this also, 
hi- interpreted to him the vision of the Image, which he who 

had seen it himself knew not ; for he says, Tell me the vision, v - Dan - 

2 26 31. 
which I who saw it know not. Thou seest the power of the 

Holy Ghost; that which they who saw it know not, they who 
saw it not know and interpret. 

32. And indeed it were easy to collect very many texts out 
of the Old Testament, and to discourse more largely con- 
cerning the Holy Ghost. But the time is short; and we 
must confine ourselves to a hearing of suitable length. 
Wherefore, being now content awhile with passages from the 
Old Testament, we will, if it be God s pleasure, proceed in 
the next Lecture to what remains to bring out of the New 
Testament. And may the God of peace, through our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and through the love of the Spirit, count all Rom. 
of you worthy of spiritual and heavenly gifts : To whom * 
he glory and power for ever and ever. Amen. 



LECTURE XVII. 



ON THE HOLY GHOST. 



1 COK. xii. 8. 

For to one is given by the Spirit the ivord of wisdom ; to 
another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit ; 



LECT. 1. IN the preceding Lecture, we set forth according to our 
- * ability to the ears of your love some small portion of the 
testimonies concerning the Holy Ghost ; and on the present 
occasion, we will, if it be God s pleasure, proceed to treat, as 
far as may he, of those which remain out of the New : and as 
then we restrained our eagerness within bounds in what you 
heard, (for there is no satiety in discoursing concerning the 
Holy Ghost,) so now we must say but a small part of w r hat 
remains. For now, as well as then, we freely own that our weak 
ness is overwhelmed by the multitude of what is written. 
Neither to-day will we use the subtleties of men, for that 
were not convenient; but merely call to mind what comes 
from the Divine Scriptures ; for this is the safest course, ac- 
1 Cor. 2, cording to the blessed Apostle Paul, who says, Which things 
also we speak, not in the words which mat^s wisdom teacheth, 
but which the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing spiritual 
things with spiritual. Thus we act like travellers or voy 
agers, who having one goal to a very long journey, though 
they with diligence hasten on, yet by reason of human weak 
ness, are wont to take in their way divers cities or harbours. 
(2.) 2. Therefore though the discourses concerning the Holy 
Ghost are divided, yet He Himself is undivided, being one 



of the Holt/ Ghost; the Spirit of Truth, the Comforter. 221 

and the same. For as in speaking concerning the Father, at 
out- time the subject of our teaching was how He is the 
only Cause; and at another, how He is called Father, 
Almighty ; and at another, how He is the Creator of all things ; 
tin 1 division of the Lectures making no division of the Faith, 
in that He, the Object of devotion, both was and is, One ; 
and again, as in discoursing concerning the Only-begotten Son 
of (J od, we taught at one time concerning His Godhead, and 
ut another concerning His manhood, dividing into many 
discourses the doctrine concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, yet 
proclaiming without division faith towards Him; so now 
also though the Lectures concerning the Holy Spirit are 
divided, yet we preach faith undivided towards Him. For it 
is One and the Self-same Spirit who divides His gifts to every \ Cor. 
mtin severally as He will, Himself the while abiding an-* 
divided. For the Comforter is not different from the Holy 
Ghost, but one and the self-same, called by various names; 
who lives and subsists, and speaks, and works; and of 
rational natures made by God through Christ, both of Angels 
and of men, He is the Sanctiiier. 

3. But lest any from lack of learning, should suppose from 
the different titles of the Holy Ghost that these spirits are 
divers, and not one and the self-same, who is alone, the 
Catholic Church guarding thee beforehand hath delivered to 
us in the profession of the faith, to " believe in one Holy 
Ghost the Comforter, who spake by the Prophets ;" that thou 
mightest know, that though His names be many, the Holy 
Spirit is but one ; of which names, we will now rehearse a 
tV\v out of many. 

4. He is called the Spirit, according to the Scripture just (3.) 
now read, For to one is yiren by the Spirit the word of wisdom. \ Cor. 
He is called the Spirit of Truth, as the Saviour says, W*fa*\\*\Q 
He, the Spirit of Truth, is come. He is called also the Com- 13. 
toiler, as He said, For if I go not away, the Comforter icilllb. v.7. 
7io* come unto you. But that He is one and the same, though 
called by different titles, is shewn plainly from the following. 

1 &gt;r that the Holy Spirit and the Comforter are the same, isib. H, 
declared in those words, l&gt;ul the Comforter, which is Me 26 - 16 - 

* &C 

Holy Ghost ; and that the Comforter is the same as the Spirit 

of Truth, is declared, when it is said, And I it-ill give vou***** 

J Cyr. J- 



222 The Spirit of God, of he Father, of the Lord, of Christ, oftheSon 

LKCT. another Comforter, that He may abide with you for ever, even 
the Spirit of Truth; and again, Hut when the Comforter is 



vu t He 

shall come whom 1 will send unto you from the Father, cren the 

rec text. S P irit f Truih - And IIe is called the s P irit of God &gt; ac- 
Ib. 15, cording as it is written, And I saw the Spirit of God &lt;le- 

Mat. 3, Bending ; and again, For as many ax are led by the Spirit oj 
16 - God, they arc the sons of God. He is called also the Spirit 
1,32. of the Father, as the Saviour says, For it is not ye that speak, 
Rom.Q,fr ff f fj te Spi r it of your Father which speakcth in you; and 
Mat.io, again Paul saith, For this cause I boir my knees unto the 
Eph 3 Father of our Lord Jesus Christ ; . . . that He would grant 
14. 16. you to be strengthened by His Spirit. He is also called the 

Spirit of the Lord, according to that which Peter spake, 
Acts 5, Why is it that ye nave agreed together to tempt the Spirit of 

the Lord ? He is called also the Spirit of God and Christ, as ! 
Rom. 8, p au i writes, But ye are not in the flesh, but in lite Spirit, if 

so be tliat the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man 

hare not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His. He is called 
Gal. 4, also the Spirit of the Son of God, as it is said, And because ye \ 

+ 

are sons, God hath se tit forth the Spirit of His Son. He is 
J Pet. l, called also the Spirit of Christ, as it is written, Searching \ 

-. 

what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which teas 
rhil. l, in them did signify; and again, Through your prayer, and 

the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. 

5. Thou wilt find many other titles of the Holy Ghost 

besides. Thus He is called the Spirit of Holiness, as it is 
Rom. 1, written, According to the Spirit of Holiness. He is also 
R om&gt; QI called the Spirit of adoption, as Paul saith, For ye hare not 
16&lt; received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye hare 

received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. 

He is also called the Spirit of revelation, as it is written, 
Eph. l, May give you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in Ike 

knowledge of Him. He is also called the Spirit of promise, 
Eph. l, as the same Paul says. In whom also after that ye bettered, 

ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise. He is also 
Heb. 10, called the Spirit of grace, as when he says again, And hath 

done despite to the Spirit of grace. And by many other such- 
v. Cat. like titles is He named. And thou heardest in the foregoing 

xvi 28 

Ps. 143, Lecture, that in the Psalms, He is called atone time the good 
lo c 51 Spirit, and at another the princely Spirit; and in Ksaias 

1 .o. 







of Holiness, of Adoption, of Revelation, of Promise, of Grace. 223 

He was styled the Spirit of wisdom, and of understanding, 
and of counsel, and of might, and of knowledge, and of god 
liness, and of the fear of God. By all which Scriptures both 
those before and those now alleged, it is established, that 
though the titles of the Holy Ghost be different, He is one 
and the same; living and subsisting, and always present 
together with the Father and the Son ; not uttered or breathed 
by the mouth and lips of the Father and the Son, nor 
dispersed into the air, but having a real substance, speaking i 
Himself, and working, and dispensing, and sanctifying; the 
saving dispensation which is to usward from the Father and 
the Son and the Holy Ghost, being consistent and harmoni- 
ous and one, as we have also said before. For I wish you*" 
to keep in mind those things which were lately spoken, and 
to know clearly that there is not one spirit in the Law and the 
Prophets, and another in the Gospels and Apostles ; but that 
it is One and the Self-same Spirit, which both under the Old 
and under the New Testament, spake the divine Scriptures. 

6. This is the Holy Ghost, who came upon the Holy Virgin (4.) 
Mary; for since He who was born was Christ the Only- 
begotten, the power of the Highest over shadowed her, and the Luke 1, 
Holy Ghost coming upon her, sanctified her, that she might 35 

be able to receive Him, by whom all things were made. John 1, 
I have no need of using many words for thee to learn that 3&lt; 
that birth was without defilement or taint, for thou hast 
learned it. It is Gabriel who says to her, I am the herald 
of what shall be done, but I have no part in it. Though an 
Archangel, 1 know mine place ; and though I joyfully bid 
thee All hail, yet how thou shalt bring forth, is not of 
any grace of mine. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, Luke 1, 

o t 

f/ l the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee ; therefore 
&lt;tlxo that Holy Thing which shall be born of thee shall be 
called the Son of God. 

7. This Holy Spirit wrought in Elisabeth ; for He has in 
knowledge not virgins only, but acknowledges matrons also, 

that their marriage be lawful. And Elisabeth was filled 
with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied; and that noble hand 
maiden says of her own Lord, And whence is this to me, thatL\&Q i, 
Me Mother of my Lord should come to me ? For Elisabeth 43&lt; 
Counted herself blessed. Filled with this Holy Spirit, Zacharias 



224 The Spirit descended on Christ at His Baptism. 

LECT. also, the Father of John, prophesied, telling how many 
- good things the Only-begotten should procure, and that John 
should be His harbinger through baptism. By this Holy 
Ghost also it was revealed to just Symeon, that he should 
not see death, till he had seen the Lord s Christ ; and he 
received Him in his arms, and bore clear testimony in the 
Temple concerning Him. 

8. But John moreover, who had been filled with the Holy 

Ghost from his motlrer s womb, was for this cause sanctified, 

vid. sup. that he might baptize the Lord ; not giving the Spirit himself, 

7 but preaching glad tidings of Him who gives the Spirit 

Mat. 3, p or h e says, / indeed baptize you with water to repentance, 

but He that cometh offer me is mi yh tier than /, and the 

rest; He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with 

fire. With fire, wherefore? because the descent of the Holy i 

Ghost was in fiery tongues ; concerning which the Lord 

Luke 12, says joyfully, / am come to send fire on the earth; and 

what will /, if it be already kindled? 

(5.) 9. This Holy Ghost descended on the Lord at His baptism, 
that the dignity of Him who was baptized might not be 
John l, hidden ; as John says, But He which sent me to baptize with 
water, the same said unto me, Upon whomsoever thou shalt 
see the Spirit descending and remaining upon Him, the same 
is He which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. But see what 
saith the Gospel; the heavens were opened ; they were opened 
Mat. 3, because of the dignity of Him who descended ; for, lo, he 
says, The heavens were opened^ and he saw the Spirit of God 
descending like a dove, and lighting upon Him : that is, with 
voluntary motion in His descent. For it behoved, as some have 
interpreted, that the handsel and first-fruits of the Holy 
Spirit in the baptized, should be given to the manhood of 
the Saviour, who confers such grace. But perhaps He came 
down in the form of a dove, as some say, to exhibit a figure 
of one who is pure and innocent and undefiled, and also 
helps in the prayers for the children she has begotten, and for 
forgiveness of sins ; as it was emblematically foretold that 
Christ should be thus manifested in the appearance of His 
eyes ; for in the Canticles she cries concerning the Bride- 
Cant. 5, groom, and says, His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers 

1 2 

of water. 



xtsfrom the New Testament concerning the Holy Ghost. 225 

10. Of this dove, the dove of Noe, according to some, was 
in part a figure. For as in his time by means of wood and 
of \valrr salvation came to men, and the beginning of a new 
i-ivution, and the dove returned to him towards evening with 
an olive branch, thus, say they, the Holy Ghost also de- 

nded upon the true Noe, the Author of the second birth, 
who draws together into one the wills of all nations, of whom 
tlie various sorts of animals in the ark were a figure: Him 
at whose presence, the spiritual wolves feed with the lambs, 
in whose Church the calf, and the lion, and the ox, feed in 
the same pasture, as we behold to this day the rulers of the 
world guided and taught by Churchmen, The spiritual dove * 
therefore, as some interpret, came down at the season of His 
baptism, that He might shew that it is He who by the wood 
of the Cross saves them who believe, who should at eventide 
through His death vouchsafe to them salvation. 

11. And of these tilings perhaps there may be another 
exposition ; and now too we ought to hear the words of the 
Saviour Himself concerning the Holy Ghost. For He says, 
Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, He cannot John 3, 
enter into the kingdom of God. And because this grace is 






from the Father, He says, How much more shall your heavenly 
Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him. And 
because we ought to worship God in the Spirit, He says, 
But the hour cometh and now is, when the true worshippers J hn 4 
shall worshij) th? Father in spirit and in truth ; for the 
Father seekcth such to worship Him. God is a Spirit ; and 
they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in 
truth. And again, But if I cast out devils by the Spirit Q/" Mat. 12, 
(*id; and immediately afterwards, Wherefore I say unto you, v . 31. 
all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men ; 
but the blasphemy against t/ic Holy Ghost shall not be for given. 
A il whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it 
mlni.ll be forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh a word against 
the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this 
ii-orhl, neither in the world to come. And again He sav-. 
And I will pray the Father, &lt;tntl He shall give you another John 14, 
l inf&lt;&gt;r(er, that He ni&lt;iy be with you for ever, the Spirit f/jjcyr. 
Truth; n-hntji tin- M-nrld rnnnul receive, bwnixe it seef/t Ifijnf* "? 
/. neither knnweth Him ; but ijc knoiv HiniJ or He tlwclleth rec.text. 

Q 



226 Texts from the New Testament concerning the Holy Ghost. 

LECT. with you, and shall be in you. And again He says, These 

- things haw I spoken unto you being yet present with you. 

But lh&lt;&gt; Comforter, whi&lt;-h is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father 
will send in My name. He shall teach you all t /tings, and 
bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said 

ib. 15, unto you. And again He says, But when the Comforter is 
come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the 
Spirit of Truth, which procecdeth from the Father, He shall 

lb.16,7. testify of Me. And again the Saviour says, For if I go not 
away, the Comforter will not come unto you. . . . And when He 
is come, He will reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, 

vcr. 12. and (f judgment ; and afterwards again, / have yet many 
things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them yet. How- 
beit, when He the Spirit of Truth is come, He will guide you 
into all truth; for He shall not speak of Himself; but what 
soever He shall hear that shall He speak, and He will shew 
you things to come. He shall glorify Me, for He shall receive 
of mine, and shall shew it unto you. All things that the 
Father hath are mine ; therefore said I, That He shall take 
of mine, and shall shew it unto you. I have read to thee now 
what the Only-begotten Himself has uttered, that thou mayest 
not give heed to human words. 
(7.) 12. The fellowship of this Holy Spirit He bestowed on the 

John 20, Apostles : for it is written, And when He had said this He 
breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy 
Ghost; whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto 
them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. 

vid.supr. This was the second time He breathed, (His first breath 
having been stifled by wilful sins ;) that the Scripture might 

Nahum be fulfilled, He went up breathing upon thy face, and de- 

s t " liver ing thee from affliction. But whence went He up ? From 
Hades ; for thus the Gospel relates, that after His resurrection 
then He breathed on them. But though He bestowed His 
grace then, He was to lavish it yet more bountifully; and 
He says to them, " I truly am ready to give it even now, but the 
vessel cannot yet hold it; for a while therefore receive ye grace, 
according as ye can bear it ; but look forward for even more ; 

Luke24, but tarry ye in, the city of Jerusalem, until ye be invested 
with power from on high. Receive it in part now ; then, ye 
shall bear it in its fulness." For he who receives often, pos- 



The Holy Ghost enters and invest* the soul. 227 

scs the gift but in part; but he who is invested, is com 
pletely enfolded by his robe. " Fear not," He says, " the 
ipons and darts of the devil ; for ye bear with you the power 
of the Holy Ghost." But remember that the Holy Ghost 

not divided, but the grace which is by Him. 

13. Jesus therefore went up into heaven, and fulfilled the 
promise. For He said to them, I trill pray the Father, 

lie shall y ire you another Comforter. They were accordingly 
sitting, looking for the coming of the Holy Ghost; and when 
the day of Pentecost was fully come, here, in this city of Acts 2, 
Jerusalem, (for this honour also belongs to us ; and we speak 
not of good which has happened among others, but of that 
which has been vouchsafed among ourselves,) on the day 
of Pentecost, I say, they were sitting, and the Comforter came 
down from heaven, the Guardian and Sanctifier of the Church, 
the Ruler of souls, the Pilot of the tempest-tossed, the Enlight- 
ener of the lost, who presides in the combat, and crowns 
the victors. 

14. But He came clown to invest the Apostles with power, (8.) 
and to baptize them; for the Lord says, ye shall be baptized^, 1, 5. 
with the Holy Ghost not many days hence. His grace is 

not in part, but His power is in full perfection ; for as he 
who plunges into the waters and is baptized is encompassed 
on all sides by the waters, so were they also baptized com 
pletely by the Holy Ghost. The water however envelops but 
outwardly, but the Spirit baptizes also the soul within, and that 
perfectly. And wherefore wonderest thou ? Take an example 
from matter; poor indeed and common, yet useful for the 
simpler sort. If the fire penetrating the mass of the iron 
makes the whole of it fire, so that what was cold becomes 
burning and what was black is made bright, if fire which is 
a body thus penetrates and works without hindrance in iron 
which is also a body, why wonder that the Holy Ghost enters 
into the very inmost recesses of the soul ? 

15. And lest men should be ignorant of the greatness of 
that mighty gift, which was coming down to them, there 
sounded as it were a heavenly trumpet. For suddenly there Ib. 2, 2. 
came a sound from hearett as of a rushing miyhty whid^ 
Minifying the presence of Him who was to grant unto men, 
seize with violence the kingdom of God ; that both their 

Q2 



228 The Holy Ghost obliterates sin and brightens the soul. 

LECT. eyes might see the fiery tongues, and their ears hear the 
I sound. And it filled all the house where they were sitting ; 
wroZ. for the house became the vessel of the spiritual water; as the 
disciples sat within, the whole house was filled. Thus they 
were entirely baptized according to the promise, invested 
soul and body with a divine and saving garment. And there 
appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire ^ and it sat 
upon each of them ; and they were all filled with the Holy 
(I/tost. They partook of fire, not of burning but of saving 
fire ; of fire which consumes the thorns of sins, and gives 
lustre to the soul. This is now coming upon you also, and 
that, to strip away and devour your sins which are like 
thorns, and to brighten that precious possession of your 
souls, and to give you grace; for He gave it then to the 
Apostles. And He sat upon them in the form of fiery 
tongues, that by fiery tongues their heads might be encircled 
with new and spiritual diadems. The fiery sword barred of 
old the gates of Paradise ; the fiery tongue which brought 
salvation restored the gift. 

(9.) 16. And they began to speak with other tongues, as the 
Acts 2, Spirit gare them utterance. The Galilean Peter or Andrew 
spoke Persian or Median. John and the rest of the 
Apostles spake every tongue to those of Gentile extraction ; 
(for it has not arisen in our time that multitudes of strangers 
assemble here from all quarters, but they have done so 
since that time.) What teacher can be found so great as to 
teach men things at once which they have not learned ? So 
many years are they in learning by grammar and the other 
arts to speak well Greek only; nor do all speak even this 
equally well ; the Rhetorician perhaps succeeds in it, and the 
Grammarian sometimes not, and the Grammarian is igno 
rant of the subjects of philosophy. But the Holy Spirit 
taught the Apostles many languages at once, languages 
which all their life long they had not known. This is in 
truth vast wisdom, this is power divine. What a contrast is 
their long ignorance in time past, and their sudden utterance 
of these divers and strange languages ! 

17. The multitude of the hearers was confounded; it was a 
second confusion, in the room of that first evil one at Baby 
lon. For in that confusion of tongues, there was division of 



The Holy Ghost given wholly, not in part, at Pentecost. 

purpose, because their feelings were ungodly; but here minds 
were restored and united, because the object of interest 
was godly. The means of falling were the means of recovery. 
Wherefore they marvelled, saying, How hear we them speak 
ing / No marvel if ye be ignorant ; for even Nicodemus 
was ignorant of the coming of the Spirit, and to him it was 
said, The Spirit breatheth where it listeth, and thou hearcst John 3, 
the voice thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and 
whither it goeth ; but if even though hearing His voice, 
I know not whence He cometh, how can I explain what He &*&&- 
is in substance ? 

18. But others mocking said, These men are full of new (10.) 
wine, and they spoke truly though in mockery. For in truth 

the wine was new, even the grace of the New Testament; 
but this new wine was from the spiritual Vine, which had * 
oftentimes ere this borne fruit in Prophets, and had budded 
in the New Testament. For as in things sensible, the vine 
over remains the same, but bears new fruits in its seasons, so 
also the self-same Spirit continuing what it is, as it had often 
wrought in Prophets, now manifested a new and marvellous 
work. For though His grace had been extended on the 
Fathers also, yet it came at this time exuberantly ; for before 
they hut partook of the Holy Ghost, but now they were bap 
tized wholly. 

19. But Peter who had the Holy Ghost, and who knew 
what he possessed, says, " Men of Israel, ye who preach Joel, Acts 2. 
but know not the things which are written, these men are not^ &c * 
drunken as ye suppose. Drunken they are, not however as 

ye suppose, but according to that which is written, 7$ey p s .36,8. 
shall be drunken with the fatness of *hy house ; and thou Se P tt 
shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. They 
are drunken, yet sober ; their drunkenness is a death to sin 
and a quickening of heart, a drunkenness contrary to that of 
llie body ; for this last even causes forgetfulness of what was 
known, but that even bestows the knowledge of what was 
not known. They are drunken, for they have drunk the wine 
of the spiritual vine, which says, / am the vine and ye are W T S . 
the lu-anchcs. But if ye are not persuaded by me, understand j! ohn15 
what I tell you from the very time of the day ; for it is the 
third hour of the day. For He who, as Mark relates, was 



230 St. Peter s speech at Pentecost. 

LECT crucified at the third hour, has now at the third hour sent 

-down His grace. For His grace is not other than the Spirit s 

grace, but He who was then crucified, who also gave this 
promise, has now made good that which He promised. And 
if ye would receive a testimony also of this, Listen," he says : 
" But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel ; And 
it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour 
of My Spirit" (and this word, I will pour, implied a rich gift; 

John3,ybr God (jii-eth not the* Spirit by measure, for the Father 
loveth the Son, and hath given all things into His hand; and 
lie has given Him the power also of bestowing the grace of 
the All-holy Spirit on whomsoever He will;) I will pour of 
My Spirit upon alljicsh, and your sons and your daughters 
shall prophesy ; and afterwards, And on My servants and on 
My handmaidens I will pour out in those days of My Spirit, 
"/id they shall prophesy." The Holy Ghost is no respecter 
of persons ; for He seeks not dignities, but piety of soul. Lot 
not either the rich be pulled up, or the poor dejected, but 
only let each prepare himself for the reception of the Heavenly 
gift. 

(11.) 20. We have said much to-day, and perchance you are 
weary of listening ; yet more still remains. And in truth 
for the doctrine of the Holy Ghost there were need of a 
third lecture ; and of many besides. But we must have your 
indulgence on both points. For as the Holy Festival of Easter 
is at hand, we have this day lengthened our discourse ; 
yet we had not room to bring before you all the testimonies 
from the New Testament, which we ought. For much is 
still to come from the Acts of the Apostles, in which the grace 
of the Holy Ghost wrought mightily in Peter and in all the 
Apostles together ; much also from the Catholic Epistles, and 
the fourteen Epistles of Paul ; out of all which we will now 
endeavour to gather a few, like flowers from a large meadow, 
merely by way of remembrance. 

faoifas. 21. For in the power of the Holy Ghost, by the will of 
Father and Son, Peter standing with the Eleven, and lifting 

Is. 40, 9. up his voice, (according to the text, Lift up thy voice icilh 
strength, thou that bringest good tidings to Jerusalem,) 
captured in the spiritual net of his words, about three thou 
sand souls. So great was the grace which wrought in all UK 



Texts from the Acts of the Apostles. 231 

Apostles together, that, out of the Jews, the crucifiers of 
Christ, this great number believed, and were baptized in the 
Name of Christ, and continued stedfetstty in the Apostles Acts 2, 
doctrine and in prayers. And again in the same power of the * 
Holy Ghost, Peter and John as they went up into the Temple 
at the hour of prayer, which was the ninth hour, in the Name 
of Jesus healed the lame man at the Beautiful gate, who had 
so been from his mother s womb for forty years ; that it might 
be fulfilled which was spoken, Then shall the lame man leap Is. 35,6. 
as an hart. And thus, as they swept into the spiritual rA*- 
meshes of their doctrine five thousand believers at once, so 
they confuted the bewildered rulers of the people and chief 
priests, and that, not by their own wisdom, for they erere Acts 4, 
unlearned and ignorant men, but by the mighty power of the 3 * 
Holy Ghost; for it is written, Then Peter filled with the Holy Acts 4, 
Ghost said to them. So great also was the grace of the Holy 8 - 
Ghost, which wrought by means of the Twelve Apostles in 
them who believed, that they were of one heart and of one soul, v . 32. 
and their enjoyment of their goods was common, the possessors 
piously offering the prices of their possession, and no one 
among them wanting aught ; while Ananias and Sapphira, 
who attempted to lie to the Holy Ghost, underwent their 
befitting punishment. 

22. And by the hands of the Apostles were many signs and Acts 5, 
wonders wrought among the people. And such spiritual grace 12&gt; &c * 
was shed around the Apostles, that gentle as they were, they rt *s 
were the objects of dread ; for of the rest durst no man join 
himself to them ; but the people magnified them. And mul 
titudes were added of them who believed in the Lord, both of 
men and women ; and the streets were filled with sick on 
beds and couches, that at least the shadow of Peter, passing 

by, might overshadow some of them. And the multitude also 
of the cities round about came unto this holy Jerusalem, 
bringing sick folks, and them, which were vexed -with unclean 
spirits, who were healed every one in this might of the Holy 
Ghost. 

23. Again, when the Twelve Apostles, after having been (12.) 
cast into prison by the chief priests for preaching Christ, and 
having been marvellously delivered from it at night by an 
Angel, were brought to the judgment hall to them out of the 



232 Texts from the Acts of the Apostles. 

LHCT. Temple, they fearlessly rebuked them, in their discourse to 
- them concerning Christ. And when they added this, that 



&lt;?i ven His Holy Spirit to them that obey Him, and 
had been beaten, they went their way rejoicing, and ceased 
not to teach and preach Christ Jesus. 

24. Nor in the Twelve Apostles only wrought the grace of 
the Holy Ghost, but also in the first-born children of this 
once barren Church, I mean the seven Deacons ; for these 

Acts 6, also were chosen, as it is written, being full of the Holy 

Ghost and of wisdom. Of whom Stephen, rightly so named, 

the first-fruits of the Martyrs, a man full of faith and of the 

Holy Ghost, did great wonders and miracles among the 

people, and vanquished those who disputed with him ; for 

they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit by 

which he spake. And when he was maliciously accused and 

brought to the judgment hall, he was radiant with angelic 

effulgence ; for all they who sat in the council, looking sted- 

fastly on him, saw his face, as it had been the face of an 

Angel. And having by his wise defence confuted the Jews, 

Acts 7, those stiffnecked men, iincircumcised in heart and ears, ever 

1&gt;&c * resisting the Holy Ghost, he beheld the heavens opened, and 

saw the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God. He 

saw Him, not by his own power, but, as the divine Scripture 

says, being full of the Holy Ghost, lie looked up stedfastly 

into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on 

the right hand of God. 

25. In the same power of the Holy Ghost, and in the Name 
Acts 8, of Christ, Philip at one time, drove away in the city of 

Samaria the unclean spirits, which cried out with a loud 
voice ; and he healed the palsied and the lame, and brought 
to Christ great multitudes of believers. To whom Peter and 
John came down, and imparted with prayer, and the laying 
on of hands, the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, from which 
Simon Magus alone was declared an alien, and that justly. 
And at another time Philip was called by an Angel of the 
Lord in the way, for the sake of that most godly Ethiopian 
Eunuch, and heard distinctly the Spirit Himself, saying, Go 
near, and join thyself to this chariot. He instructed the 
Eunuch, and baptized him, and so having sent into Ethiopia a 
PS. 68, herald of Christ, according as it is written, Ethiopia shall soon 

31. 



Texts from the Acts of the Apostles. 233 

stretch out her hands unto God, he was caught away by the 
Angel, and preached the Gospel in the cities in succession. 

26. With this spirit was Paul also filled after his calling (13,) 
by our Lord Jesus Christ. Let godly Ananias come as a 
witness to what we say, he who in Damascus said to him, 

The Lord, even Jesus who appeared to thee by the way as Acts 9, 
thoii earnest^ hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy 
sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. And He straightway, 
mightily working, changed the blindness of Paul s eyes into 
restored sight ; and having vouchsafed His seal unto his soul, 
made him a chosen vessel to bear the Name of the Lord who 
had appeared to him, before kings and the children of Israel, 
and out of the former persecutor, fashioned an ambassador 
and good servant, one. who from Jerusalem, round about Kom.15, 
unto Illyricum, fully preached the Gospel of Christ, and 19 
instructed even imperial Rome, and carried the earnestness of 
his preaching as far as Spain, undergoing conflicts innume 
rable, and performing signs and wonders. Of him for the 
present enough. 

27. In the power of the same Holy Spirit, Peter also, the 
chief of the Apostles, and the bearer of the keys of the kingdom 

of heaven, healed ^Eneas the paralytic in the Name of Christ Catech. 

11 T Q 

at Lydda, which is now Diospolis, and at Joppa raised from x [, 3. 
the dead the charitable Tabitha. And being on the house 
top in a trance, he saw heaven opened, and the vessel like a Acts 10. 
sheet let down, full of beasts of every shape and sort, and 
learnt plainly through this to call no man common or unclean, 
though he should be of the Greeks. And when he was sent 
for by Cornelius, he heard clearly the Holy Ghost Himself 
saying, Behold, men seek thee ; arise therefore, and get thee 
down, and go with them, doubting nothing ; for I have sent 
than. And that it might be fully ascertained that those of 
the Gentiles also who believe are made partakers of the Holy 
Ghost, the Scripture speaks thus concerning Cornelius and 
them who were with him, when Peter was come to Cesarea, 
and taught the things concerning Christ ; While Peter yet 
*l(ke these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which 
heard the word, and they of the circumcision -which believed 
were astonished, as many as came with Peter, because that on 
the Gentiles also was poured the gift of t/w Holy Ghost. 



234 Texts from the Acts of the Apostles. 

LECT. 28. And when in Antioch, the most renowned city of 

XVII 

Syria, the preaching of Christ took effect, Barnabas was 

sent hence as far as Antioch to help on the good work, being 
Acts n, a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of faith ; who 

24 

seeing a great harvest of believers in Christ, brought Paul 
from Tarsus to Antioch, as his fellow-combatant. And \vhen 
by them crowds were instructed and assembled in the Church, 

v. 26. it came to pass that the disciples were called Christians first 
hi Antioch ; the Holy Ghost, I consider, bestowing on the 
believers that new Name, which had been promised before by 
the Lord. And the grace of the Spirit being shed forth by 
God more abundantly in Antioch, there were there prophets 
and teachers, with whom was Agabus also. And as they 

Acts 13, ministered to the Lord and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, 
Separate Me Barnabas and Saul for the ivork ichereunto 
I have called them. And after the laying on of hands, they 
were sent forth by the Holy Ghost. Now it is manifest, that 
the Spirit which speaks and sends, is a living Spirit, sub- 

l$MTut. sisting, and effectual, as we have said. 

(1-1.) 29. This Holy Spirit, who in unison with Father and Son, 
has established the New Testament in the Church Catholic, 
has set us free from the grievous burdens of the Law, those 
ordinances, I mean, concerning things common and unclean, 
and meats, and sabbaths, and new moons, and circumcision, 
mid sprinklings, and sacrifices; which were given for a 

Heb. 10, season, and had the shadow of good things to come, but 
which when the truth had come, were rightly abrogated. 
For when Paul and Barnabas were sent to the Apostles, 
because of the question moved at Antioch by them who said 
that it was necessary to be circumcised and to keep the 
customs of Moses, the Apostles who were here at Jerusalem 
by a written Epistle set free the whole world from all legal 
and typical observances ; yet they attributed not to them 
selves the full authority in this matter, but acknowledge in 

Acts 15, their Epistle, writing thus, For it hath seemed good unto the 

28 2Q 

Holy Ghost and to us to lay upon you no greater burden than 
these necessary things; that ye abstain from meats offered to 
idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from 
fornication; shewing evidently by what they wrote, that 
though the writing was by the hands of men, even the 



Texts from the Acts of the Apostles. 235 

Apostles, yet the decree was universal because of the Holy 
(iliost: which decree Paul and Barnabas took and confirmed 

otx.ovfj.i- 

throuh the universal Church. "" 






30. And now, having proceeded thus far, I must ask (15.) 
indulgence from your love, or rather from the Spirit who 
dwelt in Paul, if I be not able to rehearse every thing, by 
reason of my own weakness, and your weariness who listen. 

For when shall I in terms suitable declare the marvellous 
deeds wrought by the operation of the Holy Ghost in the 
Name of Christ? Those wrought in Cyprus upon Elymas the 
sorcerer, and in Lystra at the healing of the cripple, and 
those done in Cilicia and Phrygia and Galatia and Mysia 
and Macedonia ? or those at Philippi ; the preaching, I 
mean, and the driving out of the unclean spirit in the Name 
of Christ; and the salvation by Baptism of the jailer with his 
whole house at night after the earthquake ? or the events at 
Thessalonica ; or the address at Areopagus in the midst of the 
Athenians ; or the instructions at Corinth, and in all Achaia ? 
How shall I worthily recount the mighty deeds which at 
Ephesus by the hands of Paul, were wrought by the Holy 
Ghost? whom they of that city knew not before, but came Acts 19, 
to know Him by the doctrine of Paul ; and they when Paul 
had laid his hands on them, and the Holy Ghost had come 
upon them, spake with other tongues, and prophesied. And 
so great spiritual grace was upon him, that not only his 
touch wrought cures, but even handkerchiefs and napkins, \. 12. 
brought from his body, healed diseases, and scared away the 
spirits of evil; and moreover they also who used curious** 19. 
arts brought their books together, and burned them before 
all men. 

31. I pass by the work wrought at Troas on Eutychus, who 
fiinkimj (fa ten with sleep fell down from the third loft, and 
wv/.s- takfii up dead; yet was saved alive by Paul. I also 
pass by the prophecy addressed to the Elders of Ephesus 
assembled at Miletus, in which he openly said, That the 
Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city , saying, and the rest; for 
by saying, in every city, Paul made manifest that the marvel 
lous works done by him in every city, were of the operative 
power of the Holy Ghost, at the will of God, and in the 
Namq of Christ who spake in him. By the power of this 



236 Texts from the Epistles. 

LBCT. Holy Ghost, the same Paul hasted to this holy city Jerusa- 
: lem, and this, though Agabus by the same Spirit foretold 
what should befall him ; and he spoke to the multitudes with 
confidence, telling them concerning Christ. And when 
brought to Cesarea, and encompassed by the seats of judges, 
Paul at one time before Felix, and at another before Festus 
the governor and King Agrippa, obtained of the Holy Ghost 
grace so great, and of such overcoming wisdom, that at last 
Agrippa himself the king of the Jews said, Almost Hum 
2&gt;(&gt;rstnlest me to be a Christian. This Holy Spirit granted 
to Paul, w r hen he was in the island of Melita also, to receive 
no harm when bitten by the viper, and to effect divers cures 
on the diseased. This Holy Spirit guided him, the perse 
cutor of old, even as far as imperial Rome, a herald of Christ; 
and there he persuaded many of the Jews to believe in Christ, 
Acts 28, an d t them who gainsay ed he said plainly, Well spake the 
Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet, saying unto your fathers, 
and the rest. 

32. And that Paul was full of the Ploly Ghost, and his 
fellow Apostles, and they who after them have believed in 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, hear his own plain words in 

1 Cor. 2, his Epistles; And my speech, he says, and my preaching 

iras not with en t icing words of maifs window, but with 

2 Cor. 1, demonstration of the Spirit and of power. And again, IVho 

hath also sealed us, and given us the earnest of the Spirit. 

Rom. 8, And again, He that raised up Jesus from the dead shall also 

quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit which dwctleth in 



And again, writing to Timothy, That good thing which 
was committed to thee keep by the Holy Ghost which is given 

r*vr ii j 

VX Y I 9wQt~ *t f\ /I/O 

J ( (I f { \ 

\v, dwell- 33. And that the Holy Ghost subsists, and lives, and 

s tn &gt; speaks, and foretells, I have often said already, and Paul 
rec. text. ... J 

(16} wn ^ es ^ plainly to Timothy. Now the Spirit speaketh 

iTim.4, e *-P ress ty9 that in the latter times some shall depart from the 

* faith, which we see in the divisions not only of former times 

but of our own ; so motley and diversified are the errors of 

the heretics. And again the same Paul says, Which in other 

Eph.3,5. ages iras not made k no tat unto the sons of m en , &lt;7.9 // is now 

revealed unto the Holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit. 

Heb. 3, And again, Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost saith ; and again, 

7 



Texts from the Epistles. 237 

The Holy Ghost also witnesseth to us. And again he calls Heb.io, 
unto the champions of righteousness, saying, And take 



hclutrt of salvation) and the sword of the Spirit, which is the 17 
// ord of God, by all prayer and supplication. And again, 
And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess ; but be filled Ib.5 ,18. 
u itJt, the Spirit, speaking to yourselves in psalms, and hymns, 
and spiritual songs. And again, The grace of our Lord 2 Cor. 
Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the 
Holy Ghost. 

34. By all these proofs, and by more which have been 
passed over, is the personal, and hallowing, and effectual r- 
| power of the Holy Ghost established to them of understand- " 
ing; for the time would fail my discourse, did I set about 
alleging what yet remains from the fourteen Epistles of Paul, 
wherein he has taught with such variety, completeness, and 
piety. And to the power of the Holy Ghost it must belong, 
to grant to us forgiveness for our deficiencies by reason of the 
scantily of the time, and upon you the hearers to impress 
the more perfect knowledge of what yet remains ; while from 
the frequent reading of the sacred Scriptures you who are 
diligent come to understand these things, and by Ihis time 
;hold more stedfastly, both from these present Lectures, and 
what has before been lold you, Ihe Faith in the " One God the 
I Father Almighty; and in our Lord Jesus Christ, His Only- 
begotten Son; and in the Holy Ghost the Comforter." Though 
the word itself, and the tille of Spiril, is used widely in Ihe 
sacred Scriptures, for il is said of the Father, God is a Spirit, John 4, 
las it is written in the Gospel according to John ; and of the 
:Son, A Spirit before our face, Christ the Lord; and of the Lam. 4, 
[Holy Ghost, the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, as was said; yel 
i the very arrangement of articles observed in the Faith, if re 
ligiously understood, disproves the error of Sabellius also. 
jNow therefore return we to the point which now presses and 
lis profitable lo you. 

35. Beware lest by any means thou come lo Ihe dispensers (17.) 
of Baptism, like Simon, in pretence, thy heart the while not 
j seeking the trulh. Il is ours lo warn, bul il is Ihine lo secure 
ithyself. If by faith thou standest, blessed art thou ; if thou Rom. 
hast fallen by unbelief, from this day forward cast away Ihine * 20 * 
unbelief, and take up an undoubting faith. For, at the season 



238 T7ie Holy Ghost present in Baptism. 

LECT. of baptism, when thou goest to the Bishops, or Presbyters, or 

1 Deacons, -(for its grace is every where, in villages and in 

cities, on them of low as 011 them of high degree, on bonds 
men and on freemen, for this grace is not of men, but the gift 
is from God through men,) approach the Minister of Bap 
tism, but approaching, think not of the face of him thou 
seest, but remember that Holy Ghost of whom we are now 
speaking. For He is present in readiness to seal thy soul, 
and He shall give thee that Seal at which evil spirits tremble, 
Eph. 1, a heavenly and sacred seal, as also it is written, In whom aho 
after that yc believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of 
promise. 

36. Yet He tries the soul. He casts not pearls before 
vid. sup. swine ; if thou pretend, though men baptize thee, the TToly 
Lect.2. Spirit will not. But if thou approach with faith, while men 

minister outwardly, the Holy Ghost bestows that which is 
unseen. Thou art coming to a great trial, to a great muster, 
in that one hour, which if thou throw away, thy disaster 
is irretrievable ; but if thou be counted worthy of grace, 
thy soul will be illuminated, thou wilt receive a might which 
thou hadst not, thou wilt receive weapons terrible to the evil 
spirits ; and if thou cast not away thine arms, but keep the 
Seal upon thy soul, no evil spirit will approach thee ; for he 
will be cowed ; for by the Spirit of God are the evil spirits 
cast out. 

37. If thou believe, thou shalt not only receive remission of 
(18.) sins, but do also things which pass man s power. And mayest 

thou be worthy of the gift of prophecy also ! For thou shalt 
receive grace according to the measure of thy capacity and 
not of my words; for I may possibly speak of but small things, 
yet thou mayest receive greater. For faith is a wide field. 
All thy life long will the Comforter abide with thee ; He will 
care for thee, as for His own soldier, concerning thy goings out, 
and thy comings in, and thy plotting foes. And He will give 
gifts of grace of every kind, if thou grieve Him not by sin ; 
Eph. 4, for it is written, And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, 
whereby ye have been sealed unto the day of redemption. 
AVhat then, beloved, is it to preserve grace ? Be ye ready to 
receive grace, and when ye have received it, cast it not 
away. 



Blessing. 239 

38. And may the God of All, who spake by the Holy Ghost 
through the prophets, who sent Him forth upon the Apostles 
on the day of Pentecost, in this place, send Him forth at this 
time also upon you; and by Him keep us also, imparting 
His benefit in common to all of us, so that we may ever 
render up the fruits of the Holy Ghost, love, joy, peace, long- Gal. 5, 

19 *?*} 

Buffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temper ance, 
in Christ Jesus our Lord : By whom and with whom, together 
with the Holy Ghost, be glory to the Father, both now, and 

ever, and for ever and ever. Amen. 

I 



LECTURE XVIII. 



ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH, THE CATHOLIC 
CHURCH, AND THE LIFE EVERLASTING. 



EZEKIEL xxxvii. 1. 

The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in 
the Spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the midst qf the 
valley which was full of bones. 

LECT. i. THE root of all good works is the hope of the Resur- 

XVIII. 

^rection; for the expectation of recompence nerves the soul 
to good works. For labourers of every kind are ready to 
undergo toils, if they see their reward in prospect ; but when 
men weary themselves for nought, their heart as well as their 
body sinks early. The soldier who expects a prize is ready 
for war, but no one is forward to die for a king who is 
indifferent about those who serve under him, and bestows no 
honours on their toils. In like manner every soul believing in 
the Resurrection, is, as is natural, careful of itself; but, dis 
believing it, abandons itself to perdition. He who believes 
that his body shall remain to be raised again, is careful of 
his robe, and denies it not with fornication ; but he who 
disbelieves the Resurrection, gives himself to fornication, and 
misuses his own body, as though it were not his own. Faith 
therefore in the Resurrection of the dead, is a great doctrine 
and lesson of the Holy Catholic Church ; a great and most 
necessary point gainsayed by many, but surely warranted by the 
v.Cat.iv. truth. Greeks contradict it, Samaritans disbelieve it, heretics 
disparage it ; the contradiction is manifold, but the truth is 
uniform. 

2. Now Greeks and Samaritans together reason with us 
thus. The dead man falls, and moulders away, and is all 



Difficulties of the Resurrection answered. 241 

nod into worms; and the worms perish also; so great is 
the decay and destruction, which is the portion of the body ; 
ho\v then is it to be raised? The shipwrecked are devoured 
by fishes, which are themselves devoured. Of them who 
fight with svild beasts, the very bones are ground to powder 
and consumed by bears and lions. Vultures and ravens feed 
on the llesh of the unburied dead, and then fly abroad over 
all the world; from what places then is the body brought 
together ? For of the fowls who have devoured it, some may 
chance to die in India, some in Persia, some in the land of 
the Goths ; other men again are consumed by fire, and their 
very ashes scattered by the rain or wind; whence is the 
body brought together again ? 

3. To thee, poor feeble man, India is far from the land of (2.) 
the Goths, and Spain from Persia ; but to God who holds the 
whole earth in the hollow of His hand, all things are near at j s a. 40, 
hand. Impute not then weakness to God, from a comparison 12&gt; 

of thy feebleness, but rather dwell on His power. Moreover, 
does the sun, a small work of God, by one glance of his 
beams give warmth to the whole world ; does the atmosphere, 
which God has made, encompass all things in the world ; and 
is God then, who is the Creator both of the sun, and of the 
atmosphere, removed very far off from the earth? Imagine 
a mixture of seeds of different plants ; (for as thou art weak 
as concerning the faith, the examples which I allege are such 
also;) and that these different seeds are contained in thy 
single hand ; is it then to thee who art a man, a difficult 
or an easy matter to distinguish what is in thine hand, 
and to bring each seed together according to its nature, 
and to assign it to its own kind ? Canst thou then dis 
tinguish between things in thine hand, and cannot God 
distinguish between the things in His hand, and assign them 
their proper place? Consider what I say; is it not im 
pious to deny it ? 

4. Further, attend to the very principle of justice, and 
consider with thyself. Thou hast different sorts of servants: 
and some are good and sonic bad; thou honourest there 
fore the good, and sniitest the bad. And if thou art a judge, 
t" the good thou awardest praise, and to the transgressors. 
punishment Is then justice by thee observed a mortal man; 

R 



242 Resurrection probable from GotPt justice, and marts expectation, 

LECT. and with God, who is the ever-enduring King of all, is there 
-no retributive justice ? To deny it is impious. For consider 
what I say. Many murderers die in their hods unpunished; 
where then is the righteousness of God ? Yea, ofttiincs a 
murderer guilty of fifty murders, is beheaded once; how then 
shall he suffer punishment for the forty and nine ? Unless 
there is a judgment and a retribution alter this world, thou 
chargest God with unrighteousness. Man-el not, however, 
because of the delay of judgment; no combatant is crowned 
or disgraced, till the contest is over, and no president of the 
games ever crowns men while yet striving, but he waits till 
all the combatants are finished, that then deciding between 
them, he may dispense the prizes and the chaplets. Even 
thus God also, so long as the strife in this world lasts, 
succours the just but partially, but afterwards He assigns to 
them their rewards fully. 

(3.) 5. But if, according to thec there is no resurrection of the 
dead, wherefore condemnest thou the violators of graves ? 
For if the body perishes, and there is no resurrection to be 
hoped for, why does the violator of the tomb undergo punish 
ment? Thou seest that though thou deny the resurrection 
with thy lips, there yet abides with thee an indestructible 
instinct in its behalf? 

6. Further, does a tree after it has been cut down blossom 
again, and shall man not blossom again when cut down ? 
And does the corn sown and reaped remain to the threshing 
floor, and shall man when reaped from this world not remain 
for the threshing ? And do shoots of vine or other trees, when 
clean cut off and transplanted, come to life and bear fruit; 
and shall man then, for whose sake all these are, fall into 
the earth and not rise again ? Comparing efforts, which is 
greater, to mould in the outset a statue which was not, or 
to recast it after the same model when fallen to pieces? 
Cannot God then, who created us out of nothing, raise us 
again, who are and who decay ? But thou belie vest not what 
is written of the Resurrection, being a Greek : then from the 
analogy of nature consider these matters, and understand them 
from what is seen at this day. Wheat, it may be, or some 
other kind of grain, is sown ; and when it is cast, it dies and 
rots, and is henceforth useless for food. But that which has 



from th&lt;&gt; aiwloyy qf vegetation, miff &lt;&gt;f the Phoenix, 

vottcd, springs up in verdure ; and thai which was cast 
small, springs up most beautiful. Now wheat was made for 
us ; for wheat and all seeds were not created for themselves, 
hut for our use ; are things which were made for us quickened 
when they die, and do we lor whom they were made, not spring 
up again after our death f 

7. The season is now winter, as thou seest ; the trees now 
stand as if they were dead : where arc the leaves of the fig- 
tivo- ? where are the clusters of the vine ? These in winter 
time are dead, but in the spring green, and when the season 
is come, there is given them as it were a quickening from a 
state of death. For God, knowing thine unbelief, works a re 
surrection year by year in these visible things ; that, beholding 
what happens to things inanimate, thou mayest believe con 
cerning things animate and intelligent. Further, flies and 

;bees are often drowned in water, yet after a while revive; and 
dormice, after remaining motionless during the winter, are re- 
stored in the summer, (for to thy low thoughts like ex- 
amples are offered,) and shall He who to irrational and de 
spised creatures grants a supernatural life, not vouchsafe it to 
us, for whose sake He made them ? 

8. But the Greeks ask for a yet more evident resurrection, 
and say, that even if these creatures are raised, yet that they 
have not utterly mouldered away ; and they require to see 

! distinctly some creature rising again after complete decay. 
God knew men s unbelief, and provided for this purpose a 
bird, called a Phoenix*. This bird, as Clement writes, and as 
imany more relate, the only one of its race, going to the land of f? om - 
the Egyptians at revolutions of five hundred years, shews forth c. y. 
the Resurrection ; and this, not in desert places, lest the 
mystery which comes to pass should remain unknown, but in 
a notable city , that men might even handle what they dis 
believe. For it makes itself a nest of frankincense and myrrh 
and other spices, and entering into this when its years are 
fulfilled, it evidently dies and moulders away. Then from 
the mouldering flesh of the dead a worm springs, and this 

* The existence of the Phoenix is be- round the earth. In like manner the ex- 

lieved by Tertullian, Epipbanius, &c. as istenee of megatheria and ichthyosauri 

well as by Clement ; as was till a com- \\asnot known till lately, nor the conn, 

paratively late date the doctrine of four tion between mairnetism and elretricity, 

elements, or of the motion of the sun b Heliopolis. 

K 2 



from the analogy of man s formation and of the heavenly bodies, 

xv m worm wnen grown large is transformed into a bird ; and do 
- not disbelieve this, for thou seest the offspring of bees also 
fashioned thus out of worms, and from eggs which are most 
moist thou hast seen the wings and bones and sinews of birds 
issue. Afterwards this Phoenix, becoming fledged and a 
perfect PhcEnix, as was the former one, soars up into the 
air such as it had died, shewing forth to men a most evident 
resurrection from the dead. The Phoenix indeed is a wondrous 
bird, yet it is irrational, nor sings psalms to God ; it flies abroad 
through the sky, but it knows not the Only-begotten Son of 
God. Is then a resurrection from the dead given unto this 
irrational creature which knows not its Maker, and to us who 
ascribe glory to God and keep His commandments, shall there 
no resurrection be granted ? 

(5.) 9. But since the sign of the Phcenix is remote and uncom 
mon, and men disbelieve our resurrection still, take again the 
proof of this from what is seen every day. A hundred or two 
hundred years ago, we all, speakers and hearers, where were 
we ? Know we not the groundwork of the substance of our 
bodies ? Knowest thou not how from weak and shapeless and 
simple elements we have our beginning, and that from what 
is simple and weak is shaped the living man ? and how that 
weak element being made flesh is changed into strong nerves, 
and bright eyes, and sensitive nose, and hearing ears, and 
speaking tongue, and beating heart, and busy hands, and 
swift feet, and into members of all kinds ? and how weak 
elements become a shipwright, and a mason, and a master- 
builder, and a craftsman of various arts, and a soldier, and a 
ruler, and a lawgiver, and a king ? Cannot God then, who 
has made us of rude materials, raise us up when we have 
fallen into decay ? He who frames a body out of what is 
vile, cannot He raise it again when destroyed ? And does 
not He who fashions that which is not, raise up that which 
is and is fallen ? 

10. Take further a manifest proof of the resurrection of the 
dead, witnessed month by month in the sky and its luminaries. 
The face of the moon vanishes completely, so that no part of 
it is any more seen, yet it fills again, and is restored to its 
former state ; and for the perfect demonstration of the matter, 
the moon at certain revolutions of years suffering eclipse and 



from the law of Moses. 245 

becoming changed into blood, yet recovers its luminous 
body: God having provided this, that tliou, O man, who art 
formed of blood, mightest not refuse credence to the resurrec 
tion of the dead, but mightest believe concerning thyself also 
what thou beholdest in respect of the moon. These argu 
ments therefore use thou against the Greeks ; for with them 
who receive not what is written, fight thou with umvritteii 
weapons, by reasonings only and demonstrations, for these 
iiu-ii know not who Moses is, nor Esaias, nor the Gospels, nor 
Paul. 

11. Turn now to the Samaritans, who, receiving the Law (6.) 
only, allow not the Prophets. To them the text just now read 
from Ezekiel appears of no force, for, as I said, they admit 

not the Prophets ; whence then shall we persuade the Sama 
ritans also ? Let us go to the writings of the Law. Now God 
says to Moses, I am the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, andExod.3, 
of Jacob; this must mean of what is and subsists. ^ O 
it Abraham be dead, and Isaac, and Jacob, He is the God of 
what is nothing. When did a king ever say, that he was the 
king of soldiers whom he had not? When did any display wealth 
of which he was not the owner? Therefore Abraham and 
Isaac and Jacob must truly subsist, that God may be the 
God of things which are; for He said not, " I was their God, "" 
but / am. And that there is a judgment, Abraham shews, 
saying to the Lord, He who judgeth the earth, shall He notGen.18, 
watte judgment ? 25&lt; Sept 

12. But to this the foolish Samaritans answer by way of 
objection, that the souls possibly of Abraham and Isaac and 
Jacob continue, but that it is impossible that their bodies 
should arise. Was it then possible that the rod of righteous 
Moses should become a serpent, and is it impossible that the 

i bodies of the righteous should live and rise again ? And was 
that done contrary to its nature, and shall they not be restored 
according to their nature? Again, the rod of Aaron, though cut 
oil and dead, budded, without the scent of icaterx, sprouting j b ^ 
forth into blossoms as in the fields, though under a roof; and 9 - 
though set in dry places, yielding in one night the flowers 
and fruit of plants watered for many years. Did Aaron s rod, 
as it were, rise from the dead, and shall not Aaron himself be 
raised ? And did God work wonders in wood, to secure to 



JHI Argumentejor the Resurrection from the Law. 

LECT. him the high-priesthood, and will lie not vouchsafe to Aaron 
himself a resurrection ? A woman also was made salt contrary 
to nature; and flesh was turned into salt; and shall not flesh 
be restored to flesh ? \Vas Lot s wife made a pillar of salt, 
and shall not Abraham s wife be raised again ? By what 
power was Moses hand changed, which in one hour became 
as snow, and then was restored ? Simply by God s command. 
Had it force then, has it not foyce now? 

18. And whence in the beginning came man into being at 
all, O ye Samaritans, most shallow of men? Go to the first 
Gen. 2, book of the Scripture, which even yon receive ; And the Lard 
God formed nmn of the dust of the ground. Is dust trans 
formed into flush, and shall not flesh be again restored to 
flesh ? You must le asked too, whence the heavens had their 
being, and the earth, and the seas? Whence the sun, and the 
moon, and the stars? How from the waters were made tilings 
which fly and swim? And how from the earth all beasl 
Were so many thousands brought from nothing into being, 
.did shall we men, who bear God s image, not be raised up? 
Truly this course is mere unbelief, and an ample condemna 
tion of the unbelievers; considering Abraham addresses the 
Lord as (he Judge of (ill the earth, and the learners of the Law 
disbelieve; when it is written that man is of the earth, and the 
readers disbelieve it also. 

(7.) 14. To them therefore, the unbelievers, we say these things; 

but the words of the Prophets are for us, who believe 1 . But 

since some who also use the Prophets believe not what is 

Ps. 1,5. written, and allege against us that passage, The ungodly shatt 

*** ( not rise np in judgment, and, He that goeth dawn to the 

Ps. \\v\y rave 8 / ta M &lt; &lt;ne up no more, and, The dead Braise not Thee, 

!7. Q Lord, using ill, what is written well, it will be well in 

(Prayer 

Book.) a cursory manner, as far as is now possible, to meet them. 
For if it is said, that the ungodly shall not rise up injiidgment, 
this shews that they shall rise, not in judgment, but in con 
demnation ; for God needs not long scrutiny, but close on 
the resurrection of the ungodly follows their punishment 
And if it is said, The dead praise not Thee, O Lord, this shews, 

*to6i9- that since in this life only is the appointed time for repent- 
anee and pardon, for which they who enjoy it shall praise the 
Lord, it remains after death for them who have died in sins, 



Objections from Scripture answered. 

not to give praise as the receivers of a blessing, but to bewail 
themselves ; for praise belongs to them who give thanks, but 
to them who are under the scourge, lamentation. Therefore 
the just shall then offer praise ; but they who have died in 
sins will have no further season for acknowledgment. 

15. And respecting that passage, He that goeth down to 
the yrave shall come up no more, observe what follows, He 15 - 
shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know 10. 
//////, any more. For since the whole world shall pass away, 
and every house shall be destroyed, how shall he return to his 
own house, there being henceforth a new earth ? But they 
ought to have heard Job, saying, For there is hope of a tree, Job 14, 
if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that th* 
tender branch thereof trill not cease. Tliough the root thereof 
wa.v old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground; 

yet through the scent of water it will bud, and bring forth 
boughs like a plant. And man when he dies, departctli ; but v - Sept. 
when mortal man falls, is lie no longer ? As it were re 
monstrating and reproving; (for thus ought we to read the $. 
words, with an interrogation ;) for since a tree falls and 
revives, he says, shall not man revive, for whom all trees 
were made ? And that thou mayest not suppose that I am 
forcing the words, read what follows ; for after saying by way 
of question, When mortal man falls, is lie no longer? he says, 
If a man die, lie shall lire again ; and immediately he adds, Ib. Sept. 
/ icill wait till my change come ; and again elsewhere, Who Job 19, 
shall raise up on the earth my skin, which endures these ept * 
things. And Esaias the Prophet says, Thy dead men shall Is. 26, 
lire, together witJt my dead body shall they arise. And the 
Prophet Ezekiel, now before us, says most plainly, Bekold,E**k. 

0*7 i o 

/ will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your 
graces. And Daniel says, Many that sleep in the dust of the Dan. 12, 
earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame* 
and everlasting contempt. 

16. And many Scriptures are there which testify the Resur 
rection of the dead ; for there are other and many more sayings 
on this matter. But now, by way of remembrance only, we 
will make a passing mention of the raising of Lazarus after 
lour days; and just allude, because of the shortness of the 
time, to the widow s son also who was raised. Now also let 



248 The power residing in the bodies of Saints departed. 

LECT. me just remind you of the ruler s daughter; and mention the 
-rending of the rocks, and how there arose many bodies of the 
saints which slept, their graves having been opened. But 
specially let us call to mind that Christ was raised from the 
dead. I speak but in passing of Elias, and the widow s son 
whom he raised ; of Elisseus also, who raised the dead twice ; 
once when living, and once after his death. For when alive 
he wrought the resurrection by means of his soul ; but that not 
the souls only of the just might be honoured, but that it 
might be believed that in the bodies also of the just there 
is power, the corpse which was thrown into the grave of 
Elisseus, when it touched the dead body of the prophet, 
was quickened, and the dead body of the prophet did the 
work of the soul, and that which was dead and buried gave 
life to the dead, and while imparting life, yet continued itself 
among the dead. Wherefore ? Lest if Elisseus should rise 
again, the work should be ascribed to his soul alone ; and to 
shew, that even though the soul is not present, a virtue resides 
in the body of the saints, because of the righteous soul which 
has for so many years tenanted it, and used it as its minister. 
And let us not foolishly disbelieve, as though this thing had 
Acts 19 not happened ; for if handkerchiefs and aprons, which are 
15 - from without, touching the bodies of the diseased, have raised 
up the sick, how much more should the body itself of the 
Prophet raise the dead ? 

(9.) 17. And with respect to these instances we might say 

much, rehearsing in detail the marvellous circumstances of 

each event ; but as you have been already wearied both by the 

*t prolonged fast of the Preparation, and by the watchings, let 

furies, what has been cursorily spoken concerning them suffice for 

a while ; these words having been as it were sown thinly, 

that you, receiving the seed like richest ground, may in bearing 

fruit increase them. But be it remembered, that the Apostles 

also raised the dead ; Peter raised Tabitha in Joppa, and 

Paul raised Eutychus in Troas ; and thus did all the Apostles, 

even though the wonders wrought by each have not all been 

written. Further, remember all that is said in the first 

Epistle to the Corinthians, which Paul wrote against them 

i Cor. who said, How are tfw dead raised, and with ivhat body do 

15, 35. tfoy come t And how he says, For if the dead rise not, then 

ver. 16. ^ 



The body having shared with the soul he re., shares with ithcreafter. *2-ii&gt; 

is not Christ raised ; and how he called them fools, who ver. 36. 

believed not ; and remember the whole of his teaching there 

concerning the resurrection of the dead, and how he wrote to 

the Thessalonians, But I would not have you to be ignorant, ITIM&gt;&lt; 

brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow 

not, even as others which have no hope, and all that follows : 

but chiefly that, And the dead in Christ shall rise first. ver - }G - 

18. But especially mark this, how very pointedly Paul 
says, For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this 1 Cor. 
mortal must put on immortality. For this body shall be 
raised, not remaining weak as now ; raised, I say, the very same 
body, but putting on incorruption it shall be fashioned anew, 
as iron blending with fire becomes fire, or rather as He knows 
how, the Lord who raises us. This body therefore shall be 
raised, but it shall abide not such as it now is, but an eternal 
body ; no longer needing for its life nourishment as now, nor 
stairs for its ascent, for it shall be made spiritual, a mar 



vellous thing, such as we cannot worthily speak of. 7%ew, v - Mat - 
it is said, shall the righteous shine forth as the sun, and the cf ])an 
moon, and as the brightness of the firmament. And God, 12, a. 
foreknowing men s unbelief, has given to little worms in the 
summer to dart beams of light from their body, that from what 
is seen, that which is looked for might find credence ; for He 
who gives in part is able to give the whole also, and He who 
makes the worm radiant with light, will much more illuminate 
a righteous man. 

19. We shall be raised therefore, all with our bodies eternal, (10.) 
but not all with bodies alike ; for if a man is righteous, he 
will receive a heavenly body, that he may be able duly to hold 
converse with Angels ; but if a man is a sinner, he shall re 
ceive an eternal body, fitted to endure the pains of sins, that 
it may burn eternally in fire, nor ever be consumed. And 
righteously will God assign this portion to either company ; 
for we do nothing without the body. We blaspheme with 
the mouth, and with the mouth we pray. With the body we 
commit fornication, and with the body we keep our chastity. 
With the hand we rob, and by the hand we bestow alms ; 
and in like manner the rest. Since then the body has been 
our minister in all things, it shall also share with us what 
befals us hereafter. 



250 Sins before and after Baptism. 

20. Therefore, brethren, let us be tender of our bodies, nor 
- let us misuse them as though not our own. Let us not say 
like the heretics, that this vesture of the body belongs not to 
us c , but let us be careful of it as our own ; for we must give 
account to the Lord of all things done through the body. 
Say not, no one sees me ; think not that there is no witness 
of the deed. Human witness oftentimes there is not ; but 
He who fashioned us, an unerring witness, abides faithful in 
heaven, and beholds what thou doest. And the stains of sin 
remain in the body ; for as when a wound has gone deep into 
the body, the scar remains even after healing, even so sin 
wounds soul and body, and the marks of its scars remain in 
all ; and they are effaced only by receiving the Baptismal laver. 
The past wounds therefore of soul and body God heals by 
Baptism ; against future ones let us one and all jointly guard 
ourselves, that keeping the vestment of the body pure, we 
may not by fornication and sensual indulgence or other sin 
for a short season, lose the salvation of heaven, but may 
inherit the eternal kingdom of God ; which may God vouch 
safe to all of you of His own grace. 



(11.) 21. Thus much in proof of the Resurrection of the dead; 
and now recite ye and go through with all diligence word by 
word the profession of the faith, when I have again said it to 
you 

22. The Faith which we rehearse contains in order the 
following, " And in one Baptism of repentance for the remis 
sion of sins; and in one Holy Catholic Church; and in the 
resurrection of the ilesh ; and in eternal life." Now of Baptism 
and repentance I have spoken in the foregoing Lectures ; and 
my present remarks concerning the resurrection of the dead 
have been made with reference to the Article " In the resur 
rection of the flesh." Now then let me finish what remains 
to be said, in consequence of the Article, " In one Holy 
Catholic Church," on which, though one might say many 
things, we will speak but briefly. 

23. Now it is called Catholic because it is throughout the 
world, from one end of the earth to the other ; and because it 
teaches universally and completely one and all the doctrines 

e e. g. the Gnostics, Manichees, 



[I hy the Church Catholic is called Catholic, and why Church. 251 

which ought to come to men s knowledge, concerning things 
both visible and invisible, heavenly and earthly ; and because 
it subjugates in order to godliness every class of men, v 
governors and governed, learned and unlearned ; and because 
it universally treats and heals every sort of sins, which are 
committed by soul or body, and possesses in itself every form 
of virtue which is named, both in deeds and words, and in 
every kind of spiritual gifts. 

21. And it is rightly named Church, because it calls forth f*x- 
and assembles together all men; according as the Lord 



in Leviticus, And assemble thou all the congregation to the v. Heb. 
doors of the tabernacle of witness. And it is to be noted, that Lev .8 3. 
the word assemble, is used for the first time in the Scriptures Sept. 
here, at the time when the Lord puts Aaron into the High- 



flttffO*. 



priesthood. And in Deuteronomy the Lord says to Moses, 

Assemble to ]\fe the people* and I will make them hear My Deut. 4, 

10 
words, that they shall learn to fear J\Ie. And he again mentions 

the name of the Church, when he says concerning the Tables, 
And on them was written according to all the words which Deut. 9, 
I he Lord spake with you in, the mount out of the midst of the ^ _ *" 
Jire in the day of the Assembly ; as if he had said more plainly, **s or 
in the day in which ye were called and gathered together by p 
God. And the Psalmist says, / will give thee thanks in the 18. 
great Assembly ; I ic ill praise thee among much people. J" 12! 

25. Of old the Psalmist sung, Bless ye God in the Church, Ps. 68, 
eccn- the Lord, from the fountain of Israel. But since the * 
Jews for their evil designs against the Saviour have been cast 
away from grace, the Saviour has built out of the Gentiles a 
second Holy Church, the Church of us Christians, concerning 
which He said to Peter, Ami upon this rock 1 will build AfyMat. is, 
Church, and the yates of hell shall not prerail against it. And 18 * 
David prophesying of both, said plainly of the first which was 
rejected, / have haled the Church of the evil doers ; but of the Ps.26,6, 
second which is built up he says in the same Psalm, Lord, Jver.8. 
have loved the habitation of Thine house; and immediately 
afterwards, In the Churches will I bless the Lord. For nowver.J2. 
that the one Church in Judjea is cast off, the Churches of 
Christ are increased throughout the \vorld; and of them it is 
said, Kitty nnio the Lord a aeic sony, and His praise in thep s% 149, 
Church of the Saints. Agreeably to which the Prophet also * 



252 The title Catholic is a practical guide to the true Church. 

LECT. said to the Jews, / have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord of 

XV111 - Hosts ; and immediately afterwards, For from the rising of 

I0 the sun even unto the going down of the same, My name Khali 

ver. Ji. be great among the Gentiles. Concerning this Holy Catholic 

1 Tim.3, Church Paul writes to Timothy, That thou maycst know how 

thou onghtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is 

the Church of the Living God, the pillar and (/round of the 

truth. 

26. But since the word Church or Assembly is applied to 
different things, (as also it is written of the multitude in the 

Acts 19, theatre of the Ephesians, And when he had thus spoken, 
ho dismissed the Assembly, and since one might properly and 
truly say that there is a Church of (he evil doers, I mean the 
meetings of the heretics, the Marcionists and Manichees, and 
the rest,) the Faith has delivered to thee by way of security 
the Article, " And in One Holy Catholic Church ;" that thou 
mayest avoid their wretched meetings, and ever abide with the 
Holy Church Catholic in which thou wast regenerated. And 
if ever thou art sojourning in any city, inquire not simply 
where the Lord s House is, (for the sects of the profane also 
make an attempt to call their own dens, houses of the Lord,) 
nor merely where the Church is. but where is the Catholic 

/ 

Church. For this is the peculiar name of this Holy Body, the 
mother of us all, which is the spouse of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Only-begotten Son of God, (for it is written, 

Kph. 5, As Christ also loved the Church, and gave Himself for it, 
and all the rest,) and is a figure and copy of Jerusalem 

Gal. 4, above, which is free, and the mother of us all; which before 

26&gt; was barren, but now has many children. 

27. For when the first Church was cast off, God, in the 

1 Cor. second, which is the Catholic Church, hath set first Apostles, 

12 28 

secondarily Prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, 
then gifts of heatings, helps, governments, diversities of 
tongues, and every sort of virtue ; I mean wisdom and under 
standing, temperance and justice, alms-doing and loving- 
kindness, and patience unconquerable in persecutions. She, 

2 Cor.6,ly the armour of righteousness on the right hand and on the 

/eft, by honour and dishonour, in former days amid perse 
cutions and tribulations crowned the holy martyrs with the 
varied and blooming chaplets of patience, and now in times 



Everlasting life from the Father through the Son in the Spirit. 253 

of peace by God s grace receives her due honours from 
princes and nobles, and from every rank and kindred of man. 
And while the kings of particular nations have bounds set to 
their dominion, the Holy Church Catholic alone extends her 
illimitable sovereignty over the whole world ; for God, as it is PS. 147, 
written, hath made her border peace. But I should need 14 Sept 
many more hours for my discourse, would I speak of all 
things which concern her. 



28. In this Holy Catholic Church receiving instruction and (13.) 
behaving ourselves virtuously, we shall attain the kingdom of 
heaven, and inherit eternal life ; for which also we endure all 
toils, that we may be made partakers of it from the Lord. For 
ours is no trifling aim ; eternal life is our object of pursuit. 
Wherefore in the profession of the Faith, after the words, " And 

in the resurrection of the flesh," that is, of the dead, (of which 
we have discoursed,) we are taught to believe, " And in the 
life everlasting," for which as Christians we are striving. 

29. The Father is the real and true life ; and He through 
the Son in the Holy Spirit pours forth as from a fountain His 
heavenly gifts to all ; for through His love to man, the 
blessings of everlasting life are promised without fail even to 
us men. We must not disbelieve the possibility of this, but 
having an eye not to our own weakness but to His power, we 
must believe ; for with God all things are possible. And that 
this is possible, and that we may look for everlasting life, 
Daniel declares, And they that turn many to righteousness as Dan. 12 
the stars for ever and ever. And Paul says, And so shall we & ( v - 
be ever with the Lord : now the being for ever with the Lord \ Thess. 
implies life everlasting. But most plainly of all the Saviour 4 17&gt; 
Himself says in the Gospel, And these shall go away //v A; Mat. 25, 
everlasting fnuiishment, but the righteous into life eternal. 6&lt; 

30. And many are the proofs concerning the life ever 
lasting. And when we desire to gain this eternal life, the 
sacred Scriptures suggest to us the ways of gaining it ; of 
which, because of the length of our discourse, the texts we set 
before you shall be but few, the rest being left to the search 
of the diligent. They declare at one time that it is by faith ; 

for it is written, He that believeth on the Son hath ever lust inn John 3, 

OfJ 

life, and what follows ; and again He says Himself, Verily, Jo j in 5 

24. 



254 Texts concerning the life ever last ing. 

LECT. verily, I say unto yon. He that heareth My word*, and 

"V V T T T 

: believeth on Him that sent Me, hath everlasting life, and the 
rest. At another time, it is by the preaching of the Gospel; 

John 4, for He says, that He that rca^cth rereirrfh tea yes, and 
gathercth fruit unto life eternal. At another time, by mar- 

John 12, tyrdom and confession in Chrisfs name; for He says, And 

25&lt; he that hafeth his life in this world, x/tall keep it imto life 
eternal. And attain, by preferring Clirist to riches or kindred; 

Mat.l9,^4wf/ every one t/ta/ hath forsaken brethren* or sisters, and 

29 

the rest, shall inherit everlasting life. Moreover it is by 

v. Mat. keeping the commandments, Thou xhalt not commit adultery, 

Thou shall not kill, and the rest which follow ; as He 



v. also answered to him that came to Him, and said, Good 

_ * 

io"i7. ir / fff t shall I d&lt;&gt; that I may have eternal life ? Further, it is 
by departing from evil works, and henceforth serving Cod; 

Rom. 6, for Paul says, But noir heiny made free from sin, and heroine 
servants to Gad, ye have your fruit nnt&lt;&gt; holiness, and the end 
everlasting life. 

31. And the ways of finding etcnial life are many, though I 
have passed over them bv reason of their number. For God 
in His loving-kindness has opened, not one or two only, but 
many doors, by which to enter into the life everlasting, that, 
as far as lay in Him, all might enjoy it without hindrance. 
Thus much have we for the present spoken within compass 
concerning the life everlasting, which is the last doctrine 
of those professed in the Faith, and its termination ; which 
may we all, both teachers an 1 hearers, by God s grace enjoy ! 



(14.) 3-2. Tt remains, brethren beloved, to exhort you all by the 
word of teaching, to prepare your souls for the reception of 
the heavenly gifts. As regards the Holy and Apostolic Faith 
delivered to you to profess, we have spoken as many Lectures. 
as was possible, in the past days of Lent ; not that this is all 
we ought to have said, for our omissions are many ; and these 
perchance have been thought out better by more excellent 
teachers. And now the holy day of Easter is at hand, and 
Tit. 3, 5. your love in Christ is to be illuminated by the Laver of rege 
neration. Ye shall therefore again be taught what is requi 
site, if God so will ; with how great piety and order you must 
enter in when summoned, for what purpose each of the holy 



Directions to the Catechumens on their approaching Baptism. 255 

mysteries of Baptism is performed, and with what reverence 
and order you must go from Baptism to the Holy Altar of 
God, and enjoy its spiritual and heavenly mysteries ; that 
your souls being previously illuminated by the word of doc 
trine, ye may discover the greatness of each particular gift 
bestowed on you by God. 

33. And after the Holy and Salutary Day of Easter, 
beginning from the second day of the week, ye shall come all 
the days of the following week after the assembly into the 
Holy Place of the Resurrection, and there ye shall hear other 
Lectures, if God permit; in which ye shall again be taught 
the reasons of every thing which has been done, and shall 
receive the proofs thereof from the Old and New Testaments, 
first, of the things done just before Baptism, next, how ye 
have been cleansed from your sins by the Lord, with the Eph. 5, 
washing of water by the word, and how by being Priests 



ye have become partakers of Christ s Name, and how thex. 16. 4. 
Seal of the fellowship of the Holy Ghost has been given** 1 5 6 
you, and concerning the mysteries at the Altar of the New 
Testament, which had their beginning in this place, what 
the Divine Scriptures have delivered to us, and what is the 
power of these mysteries, and how ye must approach them, 
and when and how receive them ; and finally, how for the 
time to come ye must behave yourselves worthily of this 
grace both in works and words, that you may all be enabled 
to enjoy the life everlasting. And these things shall be spoken, 
if it be God s pleasure. 

34. Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord alway ; and (15.) 
again I say, Rejoice : for your redemption hath drawn nigh, ? 3hll&lt; f 
and the heavenly host of the Angels is waiting for your 4, 4. 
salvation. And there is now the voice of one crying in the v - Luke 
wilderness, Prepare ye the icay of the Lord ; and the " 



cries, Ho, every one that thirsteth, cotne ye to the wafers; and Is. 55, l. 
immediately afterwards, Hearken diligently unto me, andeatv.%. 
ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in 
t dii ss. And within a little while ye shall hear that excel 
lent lesson which says, Be light, be light, O thou new Jeru-Is.6o,} t 
snl&lt; -in ; for thy light is come. Of this Jerusalem the prophet 1^** 
hath said, And afterwards thou shalt be called the city of is. 1.26. 
righteousness, the fait/if id city Zion ; for out of Zion shall Is - 2 3 - 



256 Blessings. 

jo forth the law, and out of Jerusalem the word of the Lord. 

i i / 

which from hence has been showered down on the whole 



i t P W01 ld- To her the Prophet also says concerning you, Lift 
up thine eyes round about, and behold thy children gathered 

is. GO, 8. together ; and she answers, saying, Who are these that fly as 
a cloud, and as doves with their young ones to me ? (She 
calls them, clouds, because of their spiritual nature, and 

Is. 66,8. doves, from their purity.) And again she says, Who hath 

heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? shall the 

earth be made to bring forth in one day ? or shall a nation 

be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought 

forth her children. And all things shall be filled with joy 

is. 65, ineffable, because of the Lord who hath said, Behold, I 
create Jerusalem a rcjoiri/ig, &lt;md her people a joy. 

35. And may these words also apply to you, and at this 

ls - 4 - J time, Sing, O heavens, and be joyful, O earth ; for the Lord 
hal/i comforted His people^ and will have mercy on His 
afflicted. And this shall come to pass through the loving- 

is. 44, kindness of God, who says to you, / will blot out as a cloud 

Sept. thy transgression*, and as a thick cloud thy sins. But ye 
who have been counted worthy of the name of Faithful, (of 

]* Gd whom it is written, The Lord God shall call His servants by 
i &gt;). i u&gt; 

Sept. another name which shall be blessed on the earth,} ye shall 

)H h - 1 &gt; say with gladness, Blessed be the God and Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us ivith all spiritual 

ver. 7. blessings in heavenly places in Christ; in whom we have 
redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins, 
according to the riches of His grace, and what follows ; and 

r. 2, 4. again, But God who is rich in mercy, for His great love 
w hereii ith He loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath 
quickened us together with Christ, and the rest. And again 
in like manner praise ye the Lord of all good things, saying, 

Tit. 3,4. But after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour 
towards man appeared, not by works of righteousness which 
we had done, but according to His mercy He saved us, by the 
washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, 
which He shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our 
Saviour, that h&lt;&gt; ing justified by His grace, we should be made 
heirs according to the hope of eternal life. And may God 

E P h. 1, Himself and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, give unto you 

17. 18. 



Blessings. -257 

the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him , 
the eyes of your understanding being enlightened; and keep 
you ever in good works and words and thoughts :- -To whom 
be glory and honour arid might through our Lord Jesus 
Christ with the Holy Ghost now and ever, and for all the 
infinite ages of eternity. Amen. 



CATECHETICAL LECTURES 

OF 

S. CYRIL, 

ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM, 

ADDRESSED TO PERSONS RECENTLY BAPTIZED, CONCERNING THE 

SACRED MYSTERIES. 



LECTURE XIX. 

(ON THE MYSTERIES. I.) 



"\ THE RITES BEFORE BAPTISM. 



1 PET. v. 814. 



Be sober, be vi&lt;jU&lt;mt ; because your adversary the devil, as a 
roaring lion, u-alk&lt;*th (tfj(it, seeking wliom he may devour, 



LECT. 1. I LONG ago desired, true-born and dearly beloved children 
, l. of the Church, to discourse to you concerning these spiritual 
and heavenly Mysteries ; but knowing well, that seeing is far 
more persuasive than hearing, I waited till this season ; that 
finding you more open to the influence of my words from 
this your experience, I might take and lead you to the 
brighter and more fragrant meadow of this present paradise ; 
especially as ye have been made fit to receive the more 
sacred Mysteries, having been counted worthy of divine and 
life-giving Baptism. It remaining therefore to dress for you 
a board of more perfect instruction, let us now teach you 
exactly about these things, that ye may know the deep 
meaning to you-ward of what was done on that evening of 
your Baptism*. 

* On Easter Eve, which was the most Antiqu. xi. 6. . 7. 
common time of Baptism, vid. Bingh. 



Benunciation of Satan in Baptism. -j "&gt;9 

2. First, ye entered into the outer hall of the Baptistery, (2.) 
and there facing towards the West, ye heard the command to 
stretch forth your hand, and as in the presence of Satan ye 
renounced him. Now ye must know that this figure is found 
in ancient history. For when Pharaoh, that most cruel and 
ruthless tyrant, oppressed the free and high-born people of 
the Hebrews, God sent Moses to bring them out of the evil 
thraldom of the Egyptians. Then the door-posts were 
anointed with the blood of the lamb, that the destroyer might 
flee from the houses which had the sign of the blood ; and 
the Hebrew people was marvellously delivered. The enemy, 
however, after their rescue, pursued them, and saw the 
sea wondrously parted for them; nevertheless he went on, 
following in their footsteps, and was all at once overwhelmed 
and engulphed in the Red Sea. 

3. Now turn from the ancient to the recent, from the figure 
to the reality. There we have Moses sent from God to 
Egypt ; here, Christ sent by His Father into the world : 
there, that Moses might lead forth an oppressed people out of 
Egypt; here, that Christ might rescue mankind who are 
whelmed under sins : there, the blood of a lamb was the spell 

! against the destroyer ; here, the blood of the unblemished 
Lamb Jesus Christ is made the charm to scare evil spirits : 
there, the tyrant pursued even to the sea that ancient people ; 
and in like manner this daring and shameless spirit, the 
author of evil, followed thee, even to the very streams of 
salvation. The tyrant of old was drowned in the sea; and 
this present one disappears in the salutary water. 

4. However, thou art bidden with arm outstretched to say 
to him as though actually present, " I renounce thee, Satan." I 
wish to say, wherefore ye stand facing to the West ; for it is 
necessary. Since the West is the region of sensible dark- 

! ness, and he being darkness, has his dominion also in dark 
ness, ye therefore, looking with a symbolical meaning towards 
j the West, renounce that dark and gloomy potentate. What 
i then did each of you standing up say? " I renounce thee, 
Satan," thou wicked and most cruel tyrant ! meaning, " I fear 
thy might no longer ; for Christ hath overthrown it, having 
partaken with me of flesh and blood, that through these He 
might by death destroy death, that I might not for ever beHeb. 2, 

s 2 14 



200 Renunciation of sin and the world in Baptism. 

LECT. subject to bondage. I renounce thee, thou crafty and most 

J\?/&gt;^1*. subtle serpent. I renounce thee, plotter as thou art, who 

" under the guise of friendship didst work all disobedience, and 

bring about the apostasy of our first parents. I renounce 

thee, Satan, the artificer and abettor of all wickedness." 

(3.) 5. Then in the second sentence thou art told to say, " and 

all thy works." Now the works of Satan are all sin, which it 

is necessary to renounce also ; just as if a man has escaped 

a tyrant, he would have doubtless escaped his instruments 

also. All sin therefore, according to its kinds, is included in 

the works of the devil. Only know this ; that all that thou 

sayest, especially at that most thrilling hour, is written in 

God s books ; when therefore thou doest any thing contrary 

Gal. 2, to these, thou shalt be judged as a tmmjrt x*or. Thou 

renounces! therefore the works of Satan ; I mean, all deeds 



anc | thoughts which are against thy better judgment. 
\ 0. Then thou sayest, " And all his pomp." Now the pomp 
the devil is the madness of shows, and horse-races, and 



h im ting ? and all such vanity: from which that holy man 
PS. 119, praying to be delivered, says unto God, Turn aicay mine 
cues front beholding ranity. Be not interested in the mad 
ness of the shows, where thou wilt behold the wanton 
gestures of players, earned on with mockeries and all un 
seemliness, and the frantic dancing of effeminate men ; nor 
in the madness of them who in hunts expose themselves 
to wild beasts, that they may pamper their miserable appetite ; 
who, that they may indulge their belly with meats, become 
themselves truly meat for the belly of ravenous beasts ; and 
to speak justly, they for the sake of their proper god, their 
belly, cast away their life headlong in single combats. Shun 
also horse-races, that frantic spectacle, which subverts souls. 
For all these are the pomp of the devil. 

7. Moreover, things also hung up at idol festivals, either 
meat or bread, or other such things which are polluted by 
the invocation of the unclean spirits, are reckoned in the 
pomp of the devil. For as the Bread and Wine of the 
Eucharist before the holy invocation of the Adorable Trinity 
* ***- was simple bread and wine, while after the invocation the 
Bread becomes the Body of Christ, and the Wine the Blood of 
Christ, so in like manner, such meats belonging to the ponip 



Renunciation of idolatry Recital of the Creed. 

of Satan, though in their own nature plain and simple, become 
profane by the invocation of the evil spirit. 

8. And after this thou sayest, " and all thy service." Now (5.) 
the service of the devil is prayer in idol temples ; things done 

to the honour of lifeless idols ; the lighting of lamps, or 
burning of incense by fountains or rivers, (for some cheated 
by dreams or by evil spirits, have passed to these places, 
thinking to find a cure even for their bodily ailments,) and 
the like. Go not therefore after them. The watching of 
birds, divination, omens, or amulets, or charms written on 
leaves, sorceries, or other evil arts, and all such things, are 
services to the devil ; therefore shun them. For if after 
renouncing Satan and ranging thyself with Christ, thou fall 
Under their influence, thou shalt find the tyrant more bitter in 
his temptations ; perchance, because he treated thee of old as 
his own, and has let thee off from severe slavery, and has been 
greatly exasperated against thee ; so thou wilt be bereaved of 
Christ, and be tempted by him. Hast thou not heard the old 
history which tells us of Lot and his daughters ? Was not he 

v O 

himself saved with his daughters, because he gained the 
mountain, while his wife became a pillar of salt, set up as a 
beacon for ever, as the memorial of her depraved will and her 
turning back. Take heed therefore to thyself, and turn not 
again to ivhat is behind, going back after having put thine Phil. 3, 
hand to the plough, to the salt savour of this life s doings; 13 
but escape to the mountain, to Jesus Christ, that stone hewnv. Dan. 
without hands, which has filled the world. ^ 35 

9. When therefore thou renounces! Satan, utterly breaking (6.) 
all covenant with him, that ancient league with hell, there is 
opened to thee the paradise of God, which He planted towards 

the East, whence for his transgression our first father was 
exiled ; and symbolical of this was thy turning from the West 
to the East, the place of light. Then thou wert told to say, 
I believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy 
Ghost, and in one Baptism of repentance. Of which things 
^ spoke at length in the former Lectures, as God s grace 
allowed us. 

10. Therefore, guarded by these considerations, be sober. 

our adversary the derii, as was just now read, as a \ Pet. 5, 
roariny lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour. 8 * 






Exhortation. 

LECT. In former times death was mighty and devoured : but at the 
xix 
jV///.v?. i n ly Laver of regeneration, God has wiped away every tear 

off all faces. For thou shalt no more mourn, now that 



nn.ev. t ^ ou j iagl p ut o ff ^ e o }(j man but thou shalt keep holyday, 
*wyv- clothed in the garment of salvation, even Jesus Christ. 

11. And these things were done in the outer chamber. 
But if God will, when in the succeeding expositions of the 
Mysteries we have entered into the Holy of Holies, we shall 
then know the symbolical meaning of what is there accom 
plished. Now to God the Father, with the Son and the 
Holy Ghost, be glory, and power, and majesty, for ever and 
ever. Amen. 



LECTURE XX. 

(ON THE MYSTERIES. II.) 



ON THE RITES OF BAPTISM. 



ROM. vi. 3 14. 

Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus 
Christ ^were baptized into His death? fyc. . . .for ye are not 
under the Law, but under grace. 

1. THESE introductions into the Mysteries day by day, and 
these new instructions, which are the announcements of new 
truths, are profitable to us ; and most of all to you, who have 
been renewed from oldness to newness. Therefore, as is 
necessary, I will lay before you the sequel of yesterday s 
Lecture, that ye may learn of what those things, which were 
done by you in the inner chamber, were the emblems. 

2. As soon, therefore, as ye entered in, ye put off your (2.) 
garment; and this was an image of putting off the old manCo\.3 t 9. 
tcith his deeds. Having stripped yourselves, ye were naked; 

in tliis also imitating Christ, who hung naked on the Cross, 
and by His nakedness spotted principalities and powers, tuidCoi. 2, 
openly triumphed over them on the tree. For since the 
powers of the enemy made their lair in your members, ye 
may no longer wear that old vestment ; I do not at all mean 
this visible one, but that old in&lt;tn, -which is corrupt according &lt; 



to the deceitful ///.s7s. May no soul which has once put him E P h 4 
off, again put him on, but say with the Spouse of Christ in the 
Song of Songs, / have put off inij coat, how shall I put it on ? Cant. 5, 

o 

O wondrous thing ! ye were naked in the sight of all, and 
were not ashamed ; for truly ye bore the likeness of the first- 
formed Adam, who was naked in the garden, and was not 

hamed. 

3. Then, when ye were stripped, ye were anointed with (3 ^ 
exorcised oil, from the very hairs of your head, to your feet, 



264 The candidates undressed, anointed, baptized thrice. 

LECT. and were made partakers of the good olive-tree, Jesus Christ. 

Myst. 2. F r ye were cut off from the wild olive-tree, and grafted into 

" the good one, and were made to share the fatness of the true 

olive-tree. The exorcised oil therefore was a symbol of the 

participation of the fatness of Christ, the charm to drive away 

every trace of hostile influence. For as the breathing of the 

Introd sa * n t s &gt; an( l t ne invocation of the Name of God, like fiercest 

Lect. 9. flame scorch and drive out evil spirits, so also this exorcised 

oil receives such virtue by the invocation of God and by 

prayer, as not only to burn and cleanse away the traces of sins, 

but also to chase away all the invisible powers of the evil one. 

/^ \ 4. After these things, ye were led to the holy pool of Divine 

Baptism, as Christ was carried from the Cross to the Sepulchre 

which is before our eyes. And each of you was asked, whether 

he believed in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of 

the Holy Ghost, and ye made that saving confession, and 

descended three times* into the water, and ascended again; 

here also covertly pointing by a figure at the three-days 

burial of Christ. For as our Saviour passed three days and 

three nights in the heart of the earth, so you also in your first 

ascent out of the water, represented the first day of Christ in 

the earth, and by your descent, the night ; for as he who is in 

the night, sees no more, but he who is in the day, remains in 

the light, so in descending, ye saw nothing as in the night, 

but in ascending again, ye were as in the day. And at the 

self-same moment, ye died and were born ; and that Water 

of salvation was at once your grave and your mother. And 

what Solomon spoke of others will suit you also; for he said, 

Fccles There is a time to bear and a time to die ; but to you, on the 

3, 2. contrary, the time to die is also the time to be born ; and one 

and the same season brings about both of these, and your 

birth went hand in hand with your death. 

\ 5. O strange and inconceivable thing ! we did not really 
die, we were not really buried, we were not really crucified 
and raised again ; but our imitation was but in a figure, while 
our salvation is in reality. Christ was actually crucified, and 
actually buried, and truly rose again ; and all these things 
have been vouchsafed to us, that we, by imitation commu- 

* This was the ancient practice, vid. Can. Apost. 42. Bingham gives the his- 
Tertull. in Prax. 26. de Cor. Mil. 3. tory of it, Antiqu. xi. 11. . 68. 



lp witli Christ ssuffcrings. 



nicating in His sufferings, might gain salvation in reality. 
O surpassing loving-kindness! Christ received the nails in 
II is undcfiled hands and feet, and endured anguish ; while to 
me without suffering or toil, by the fellowship of His pain He 
vouchsafes salvation. 

6. Let no one then suppose that Baptism is merely the grace vid. sup. 
of remission of sins, or further, that of adoption ; as John s m 7 
baptism bestowed only the remission of sins. Nay we know 

full well, that as it purges our sins, and conveys to us the gift trgagiw. 
of the Holy Ghost, so also it is the counterpart of Christ s &lt;j, T / Ttf - 
suflerinffs. For for this cause Paul, just now read, cries aloud T,"L vl( Jc 

Hear. 9, 

and says, Know ye not that as many of us as were baptized 14. 
into Christ Jesus, were baptized into His death? Therefore^- - 6 * 

9 

we are buried with Him by baptism into death. These 
words he spake to them who had settled with themselves that 
Baptism ministers to us the remission of sins, and adoption, 
but not that further it has communion also in representation 
with Christ s true sufferings. 

7. In order therefore that we may learn, that whatsoever (6.) 
things Christ endured, He suffered them for us and our 
salvation, and that, in reality and not in appearance, we also 

are made partakers of His sufferings. Paul cried with all 
exactness of truth, For if we have been planted together in R m. 6, 
the likeness of His death, we shall be also in the likeness of** 
His resurrection. Well has he said, planted together. For 
since the true Vine was planted in this place, we also by 
partaking in the Baptism of death, have been planted together 
tcith Hint. And fix thy mind with much attention on the 
words of the Apostle. He has not said, " For if we have been 
planted together in His death," but, in 1hc likeness of His 
death. For upon Christ death came in reality, for His soul 
was truly separated from His body; and His burial was true, 
for His holy body was wrapt in pure linen; and every thing 
happened to Him truly ; but in your case only the likeness of 
death and sufferings, whereas of salvation, not the likeness, 
but the rcalitv. 

+/ 

8. Of these things then having been sufficiently instructed, 
keep them, I beseech you, in your remembrance ; that I also, 
un\\ ovthy though 1 be, may say of you, Now I love you, \ c or&lt; 
brethren, because i/e remember me in all things, and keep the \ l &gt; 2 - 

yHrw, 

Cyr. 



266 Baptism the likeness of Christ s death. 

LECT. ordinances, as I delivered them unto you. And God, who has 
Must. 2. presented you as it were alive from the dead, is able to grant 
, unto you to walk in newness of life ; because His is the 



pra " e&gt; 4 dory and the power, now and for ever. Amen. 

r t & J 



LECTURE XXI. 

(ON THE MYSTERIES. III.) 



ON THE HOLY CHRISM. 



1 JOHN ii. 2028. 

But ye have an unction from the Holy One, fyc that, 

when He shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be 
ashamed before Him at His coming. 

1. HAVING been baptized into Christ, and put on Christ, ye Gal. 3, 

(\ *i 

have been made conformable to the Son of God; for God having 
predestinated us to the adoption of sons, made us share tAeEph.i,5. 
fashion of Christ s glorious body. Being therefore made par- 21 
takers of Christ, ye are properly called Christs, and of you Heb. 3, 
God said, Touch not My Christs, or anointed. Now ye were p s . 105, 
made Christs, by receiving the emblem of the Holy Ghost; 
and all things were in a figure wrought in you, because ye 
are figures of Christ. He also bathed Himself in the river 
Jordan, and having imparted of the fragrance of His Godhead 
to the waters, He came up from them ; and the Holy Ghost 
in substance lighted on Him, like resting upon like. In the 
same manner to you also, after you had come up from thej^* 1 
pool of the sacred streams, was given the Unction, the emblem - 
of that wherewith Christ was anointed; and this is the Holy" 
Ghost; of whom also the blessed Esaias, in his prophecy re 
specting Him, says in the person of the Lord, The Spirit ofthei^Q\ t \. 
Lt,rd is upon Me, because He hath anointed Me to preach 
glad lidinys to the poor. 

2. For Christ was not anointed by men with oil or material (2.) 
ointment, but the Father having appointed Him to be the 
Saviour of the whole world, anointed Him with the Holy 
Ghost, as Peter says, Jesus of Nazareth, whom God anointed Acts 10, 

38. 



268 Oil in Baptism typifies the gift of the Spirit. 

LECT. with the Holy Ghost. And David the Prophet cried, saying, 
Mwt.3. Thy throne, God, is for ever and ever ; a sceptre of righte- 
Ps. 45, ousness is the sceptre of Thy kingdom ; Thou hast loved 
6 * 7t righteousness and hated iniquity ; therefore God even Thy 
God hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy 
felloivs. And as Christ was in truth crucified, and buried, 
and raised, and you in likeness are in Baptism accounted 
worthy of being crucified, buried, and raised together with 
Him, so is it with the unction also. As He was anointed 
with the spiritual oil of gladness, the Holy Ghost, who is so 
called, because He is the author of spiritual gladness, so ye 
were anointed with ointment, having been made partakers and 
sA5,l.f el loirs of Christ. 
/3 \ 3. But beware of supposing this to be plain ointment. For 

as the Bread of the Eucharist, after the invocation of the 

7 



. / 

%L lf - Holy Ghost, is mere bread no longer, but the Body of Christ, 

so also this holy ointment is no more simple ointment, nor (so 

to say) common, after the invocation, but the gift of Christ; 
- and by the presence of His Godhead, it causes in us the Holy 
Ghost. It is symbolically applied to thy forehead and thy 

other senses ; and while thy body is anointed with visible 

ointment, thy soul is sanctified by the Holy and life-giving 

Spirit. 

4. And ye were first anointed on your forehead, that ye might 

be delivered from the shame, which the first man, when he had 
2 Cor. 3, transgressed, bore about with him every where ; and that with 
3 open face ye might behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord. 

Then on your ears ; that ye might receive ears quick to hear 
Is. 50, 4. the divine Mysteries, of which Esaias has said, The Lord 

wakened mine ear to hear; and the Lord Jesus in the 
Mat. 11, Gospel, He that hath ears to hear let him hear. Then on 

your nostrils ; that receiving the sacred ointment ye may say, 
2 Cor. 2, We are to God a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are 

saved. Then on your breast ; that having put on the breast- 

Eph. 6, plate of righteousness, ye may stand against the wiles of the 

4. and devil. For as Christ after His baptism, and the descent of 

1 A 

the Holy Ghost, went forth and vanquished the adversary, 
so likewise, having, after Holy Baptism and the Mystical 
Chrism, put on the whole armour of the Holy Ghost, do ye 
stand against the power of the enemy, and vanquish it, 



Oil used in the consecration of Aaron and of Solomon. 26S.) 

saving, I can do all things through Christ which strength- Phil. 4, 
c net It inc. 

5. When ye are counted worthy of this Holy Chrism, ye (4.) 
an- called Christians, verifying also the name by your new 
birth. For before you were vouchsafed this grace, ye had 
properly no right to this title, but were advancing on your 
way towards being Christians. 

6. Moreover, vou should know that this Chrism has its 

V 

symbol in the old Scripture. For what time Moses imparted 
to his brother the command of God, and made him High- 
priest, after bathing in water, he anointed him ; and Aaron 
was called Christ or Anointed, from the emblematical Chrism. 
So also the High-priest raising Solomon to the kingdom, 
anointed him after he had bathed in Gihon. To them how- 1 Kings 
ever these things happened in a figure, but to you not in a lf 39 * 
figure, but in truth ; because ye were truly anointed by the 
Holy Ghost. Christ is the beginning of your salvation; He 
is truly the First-fruit, and ye the mass ; but if the First-fruit v. Rom. 
be holy, it is manifest that Its holiness will pass to the mass l 
also. 

7. Keep This unspotted : for It shall teach you all things (5.) 
if It abides in you, as you have just heard declared by the 
blessed John, who discourses much concerning this Chrism. 

For this holy thing is a spiritual preservative of the body, 
and safeguard of the soul. Of this in ancient times the 
blessed Esaias prophesying said, And in this mou wta/w ,--!. 25, 6. 
(now he calls the Church a mountain elsewhere also, as when 
he says, In the last days the mountain of the Lord s housels.1,1. 
shall be established ;) in this mountain, shall the Lord make 
unto all people a feast ; they shall drink icine, they shall drink Sept. 
gladness, they shall be anointed with ointment. And that he 
may make thce sure, hear what he says of this ointment as 
being mystical : Give all these things to the nations, for Me is. 25, 7. 
counsel of the Lord is unto all nations. Having been anointed? Sept * 
therefore, with this holy ointment, keep it unspotted and un 
blemished in you, pressing* forward by good works, and 
becoming well-pleasing to the Captain of your salvation, 
Christ Jesus, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 



LECTURE XXII. 

THE MYSTERIES. IV.) 



ON THE BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST. 



1 COR. xi. 23. 

I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto 
you, That the Lord Jesus, the same night in which He was 
betrayed, took bread, 



LECT. 1. THIS teaching of the Blessed Paul is alone sufficient to 
XXII 
Mytt. 4. gi ye y u a fall assurance concerning those Divine Mysteries, 

Eph. 3, which when ye are vouchsafed, ye are of the same body and 

&gt; 

blood with Christ. For he has just distinctly said, That our 
Lord Jesus Christ the same night in which He was betrayed, 
took bread, and when He had given thanks He brake it, and 
said, Take, eat, this is My Body : and having taken the cup 
and given thanks, He said, Take, drink, this is My Blood. 
Since then He Himself has declared and said of the Bread, 
This is My Body, who shall dare to doubt any longer ? And 
since He has affirmed and said, This is My Blood, who shall 
ever hesitate, saying, that it is not His blood ? 

2. He once turned water into wine, in Cana of Galilee, at 
His own will 3 , and is it incredible that He should have 
turned wine into blood? That wonderful work He mira 
culously wrought, when called to an earthly marriage ; and 
shall He not much rather be acknowledged to have bestowed 
the fruition of His Body and Blood on the children of the 
bride-chamber ? 

3. Therefore with fullest assurance let us partake as of the 

icj) ituftetn. Milles. Stmltv at/Min, " which is akin to blood." Ed. Ben. 



Eucharist signified in the Shew-bread and in the Psalms. 271 

Body and Blood of Christ: for in the figure" of Bread is! 
given to thee His Body, and in the figure of Wine His 
Blood; that thou by partaking of the Body and Blood of 
Christ, inightest be made of the same body and the same 
blood with Him. For thus we come to bear Christ in us, 
because His Body and Blood are diffused through our mem-! 
hers ; thus it is that, according to the blessed Peter, we be- 



2 Pet 

come partakers of the divine nature. 

4. Christ on a certain occasion discoursing with the Jews 
said, Except ye eat My flesh and drink My blood, ye have no John 6, 
life in you. They not receiving His saying spiritually were 
offended, and went backward, supposing that He was inviting M ?- 
them to eat flesh. 

5. Even under the Old Testament there was shew-bread; 
but this as it belonged to the Old Testament, came to an 

O * 

i end ; but in the New Testament there is the Bread of heaven, v. Ps. 

78 24 

and the Cup of salvation, sanctifying soul and body; for as 
the Bread has respect to our body, so is the Word appropriate 116, 12. 
to our soul. 

6. Contemplate therefore the Bread and Wine not as bare 
elements, for they are, according to the Lord s declaration, 
the Body and Blood of Christ; for though sense suggests 
this to thee, let faith stablish thee. Judge not the matter 
from taste, but from faith be fully assured without misgiving, 
that thou hast been vouchsafed the Body and Blood of 
Christ. 

7. The blessed David also shall advise thee the meaning 

of this, saying, Thou liast prepared a table before me in MePs.23,5. 
presence of mine enemies. What he says, is to this effect. 
Before Thy coming, evil spirits prepared a table for men, foul 
and polluted and full of all devilish influence; but since Thy 
coming, O Lord, Thou luixt prepared a table before me. 
When the man says to God, Thou hast prepared before me a 
tattle, what other does he mean but that mystical and spiritual 
Table, which God hath prepared over against, that is, contrary 
and in opposition to the evil spirits? And very truly; for 



b F.v TVVM. The word *&lt;**{ sometimes vid. sup. Lect. x. 1 1. and as r**ixvs and 

ean* that which stands tor a thing A ^/ are contrasted in xxi. 6: or 2. an 

-ent, sometimes that which stands for index, as Lect. iii. 6. where S. John 

a tiling absent, either 1. a type, as when Baptist s dress &c. is spoken of as a type 

Joshua is said to be a type of Christ, of his inward character; and xiii. 18. 






272 The Eucharist signified in 

LECT. that had fellowship with devils, but this, with God. Thou 
XXII 
Must. 4 *** tuwinted my head with oil. With oil He anointed thine 

ver. 5. head upon thy forehead, by the seal which thou hast of God ; 
v. Exod. that thou mayest be made the impression of the seal, Holiness 
Sept f Gd- And my cup runneth over. Thou seest that cup 
Ps.23,5. here spoken of, which Jesus took in His hands, and gave 
Mat. 26, thanks, and said, This is My blood, which is shed for many 
for the remission of sins. 

8. Therefore Solomon also, pointing at this grace, says in 
Eccles. Ecclesiastes, Come hither, eat thy bread with joy, (that is, the 
v. Sept. spiritual bread ; Come hither, calling with words of salvation 

- and blessing,) and drink thy wine with a merry heart ; (that 
is, the spiritual wine;) and let thy head lack no ointment, 
(thou seest he alludes even to the mystic Chrism ;) and let 
thy garments be always white, for God now accept eth thy 
works ; for before thou earnest to Baptism, thy works were 
vanity of vanities. But now, having put off thy old garments, 
vnot- and put on those which are spiritually white, thou must be 
embi e-- continually robed in white ; we mean not this, that thou 
mnti- must always wear white raiment; but with truly white and 
glistering and spiritual attire, thou must be clothed withal, 
Is. 61, that thou mayest say with the blessed Esaias, My soul shnll 
.^ joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the 
garments of salvation, He hath covered me with the robe of 
gladness. 

9. These things having learnt, and being fully persuaded 
that what seems bread is not bread, though bread by taste, 
but the Body of Christ; and that what seems wine is not 
wine, though the taste will have it so, but the Blood of 

Ps. 104, Christ ; and that of this David sung of old, saying, And bread 
15 which strengthened man s heart, and oil to make his face to 

shine, " strengthen thine heart," partaking thereof as spiritual, 

and " make the face of thy soul to shine." And so having it 
2 Cor. unveiled by a pure conscience, mayest thou behold as in a 
3 18 glass the glory of the Lord, and proceed from glory to glory, 

in Christ Jesus our Lord : To whom be honour, and might, 

and glory, for ever and ever. Amen. 



LECTURE XXIII. 

CON THE MYSTERIES. V.) 



ON THE COMMUNION SERVICE. 



1 Peter ii. 1. 

Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypo 
crisies, and envies, and evil speakings, fyc. 

1. ON former times of our meeting together, ye have heard 
sufficiently, by the loving-kindness of God, concerning Bap 
tism, and Chrism, and the partaking of the Body and Blood 
of Christ ; and now it is necessary to pass on to what is next 
in order, meaning to-day to give the finish to your spiritual 
edification. 

2. Ye saw then the Deacon give to the Priest water to 
wash, and to the Presbyters who stood round God s altar. 
He gave it, not at all because of bodily defilement ; no ; 
for we did not set out for the Church with defiled bodies. 
But this washing of hands is a symbol that ye ought to be 
pure from all sinful and unlawful deeds ; for since the hands 
are a symbol of action, by washing them we represent the 
purity and blamelessness of our conduct. Hast thou not 
heard the blessed David opening this mystery, and saying, 

/ will wash my hands in innocency, and so will I co?7ipassp3. 26 t 6. 
Thine Altar, O Lord? The washing therefore of hands is 
a symbol of immunity from sin. 

3. Then the Deacon cries aloud, " Receive ye one another; (2.) 
and let us kiss one another." Think not that this kiss ranks 
with those given in public by common friends. It is not 

T 



274 J7ic kiss of peace.- -The offering of praise and thanksgiving. 



xxm suca: tuis kiss Wends s uls one with another, and solicits 

Must. 5. f r them entire forgiveness. Therefore this kiss is the sign 
that our souls are mingled together, and have banished all 

Mat. 5, remembrance of wrongs. For this cause Christ said, ff thou 
briny thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy 
brother hath ought against thee ; leave there thy gift upon 
the allar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, 
(nid then come and offer thy gift. The kiss therefore is 
reconciliation, and fot this reason holy: as the blessed Paul 

L Cor. has in his Epistles urged ; Greet ye one another with a holy 

l Pet. 5, k* ss &gt; an d Peter, with a kiss of charity. 



l4 4. After this the Priest cries aloud, " Lift up your hearts." 

For truly ought we in that most awful hour to have our heart 
on high with God, and not below, thinking of earth and 
earthly things. The Priest then in effect bids all in that 
hour abandon all worldly thoughts, or household cares, and to 
have their heart in heaven with the merciful God. Then 
ye answer, " We lift them up unto the Lord :" assenting to him, } 
by your avowal. But let no one come here, who with his 
lips can say " We lift up our hearts to the Lord," but in mind 
employs his thoughts on worldly business. God indeed 
should be in our memory at all times, but if this is impossible 
by reason of human infirmity, at least in that hour, this 
should be our earnest endeavour. 

(4.) 5. Then the Priest says, " Let us give thanks to the Lord."; 
For in good sooth are we bound to give thanks, that He has 
called us, unworthy as we are, to so great grace; that He has 
reconciled us who were His foes ; that He hath vouchsafed 
to us the Spirit of adoption. Then ye say, " It is meet and J 
right:" for in giving thanks we do a meet thing and a right; 
but He did, not a right thing, but what was more than right, 
when He did us good, and counted us meet for such great 
benefits. 

(5.) 6. After this, we make mention of heaven, and earth, and 

sea; of the sun and moon; of the stars and all the creation, 

rational and irrational, visible and invisible; of Angels, Arch- . 

angels, Virtues, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, Thrones; of 

Ezek. the Cherubim with many faces : in effect repeating that call 

, 21 of David s, Magnify the Lord with me. W"e make mention 

i s, o4,o. _ 

also of the Seraphim, whom Esaias by the Holy Ghost beheld 



Consecration Sacrifice C miDnuninn ?&gt;///,. //,,&gt; tfafui. -275 

encircling the throne of God, and wit.li two of their wings 
veiling their countenances, and with two their feet, and with 
two flying, who cried, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God 
&tbao1h. For for this cause rehearse we this confession oi irj " *- 
God, delivered down to us from the Seraphim, that we may 
join in Hymns with the hosts of the world above. 

7. Then having sanctified ourselves by these spiritual 
Hymns, we call upon the merciful God to send forth His 
I Holy Spirit upon the gifts lying before Him ; that He may * 
make the Bread the Body of Christ, and the Wine the Blood 
of Christ; for whatsoever the Holy Ghost has touched, is 
sanctified and changed. 

S. Then, after the spiritual sacrifice is perfected, the (6.) 
Bloodless Service upon that Sacrifice of Propitiation, we 
entreat God for the common peace of the Church, for the 
tranquillity of the world ; for kings ; for soldiers and allies ; 
for the sick; for the afflicted; and, in a word, for all who 





stand in need of succour we all supplicate and offer this 

Ci e 

Sacrifice. 

9. Then we commemorate also those who have fallen asleep 
before us, first, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, that 
at their prayers and intervention God would receive our 
petition. Afterwards also on behalf of the holy Fathers and 
Bishops who have fallen asleep before us, and in a word of all 
who in past years have fallen asleep among us, believing that 
it will be a very great advantage to the souls, for whom the 
supplication is put up, while that Holy and most Awful 
Sacrifice is presented. 

10. And I wish to persuade you by an illustration. For I (?) 
know that many say a , what is a soul profited, which departs 



* So Tertullian, as regards the doctrine tians brought against it, and commit- 

of the Trinity. " Simplices enim quique, himself in answer to a private anderrone- 

ne dixerim imprudentes et idiotse, quse ous explanation, (in Prax. 5. 6. c.) 

major semper credentium pars est, quo- So S. Cyril here bears witness as to 

nium et ipsa regula fidei a pluribus diis what was done in the Eucharistic Rite, 

saeculi, ad unictim et verum Deum alludes to doubts and inquiries raised 

transt ert, non intelliirentes unicum qui- about it, and, by way of answer, com- 

dem, sed cum sua ceconomia esse ere- nients on it in words which may be taken 

dendum, i \i&gt; iv.-cunt ad ceconomiam." to countenance the idea of a Purgatory. 

In Prax.;&gt;. There is a close parallel be- S. Cyril by himself as little proves the 

&lt; n the two passages. Tertullian pro- latter, as Tertullian that the Son of God 

lie Catholicdoctrineofthe Trinity; is not from eternity, 
notice? the oltjrcfioiis which private Chris- 

T 2 




The Lord s Prayer. 

LECT. from this world either with sins, or without sins, if it be 

X XIII 

Must. 5. commemorated in the prayer? Now surely if, when a king had 

banished certain who had given him offence, their connec 
tions should weave a crown and offer it to him on behalf of 
those under his vengeance, would he not grant a respite to 
their punishments? In the same way we, when we offer to 
Him our supplications for those who have fallen asleep, though 
a^agrw- they be sinners 6 , weave no crown, but offer up Christ, sacri 
ficed for our sins, propitiating our merciful God both for 
them and for ourselves. 

(8.) 11. Then, after these things, we say that Prayer which the 
Saviour delivered to His own disciples, with a pure con 
science styling God our Father, and saying, Our Father, which 
art in heaven. O most surpassing loving-kindness of God! 
On them who revolted from Him and were in the very 
extreme of misery has He bestowed such complete forgive 
ness of their evil deeds, and so great participation of grace, 
as that they should even call Him Father. Our Father, 
which art in heaven; they also too are a heaven who bear 
2 Cor. 6, the image of the heavenly, in whom God is, dwelling and 
6&lt; walking in them. 

1-2. Hullmi-ed be Thy Name. The Name of God is in its 
own nature holy, whether we say so or not; but since it is 
sometimes profaned among sinners, according to the words, 
Through you My Name is continually blasphemed among the 
Gentiles, we pray that in us God s Name may be hallowed ; 
not that it becomes holy from not being holy, but because it 
becomes holy in us, when we become holy, and do things 
worthy of holiness. 

(10.) 13- Thy kingdom come. The clean soul can say with 

boldness, Thy kingdom come ; for he w r ho has heard Paul 

Rom. 6, sa J m g&gt; Let not sin reign in your mortal body, but has 

l2 - cleansed himself in deed, thought, and word, will say to God, 

Thy kingdom come. 

(11.) ^ Thy will be done as in heaven so in earth. The divine 
and blessed Angels do the will of God, as David in a Psalm 

Ps. 103, nas said, Bless the Lord, ye His Angels, that excel in strength, 
20. 

b It may be added to the last note diets the Roman doctrine, which con- 
that S. Cyril, in saying that the Eucharist siders Purgatory to be conceded to none 
avails for ei/u,K^ru\o i t " sinners," contra- but imperfect believers. 



The Lord s Prayer. 277 

that do His commandments. So then, thou meanest by thy 
prayer, " as Thy will is done by the Angels, so be it done on 
earth also by me, Lord." 

15. Give its this day our super-substantial bread* . This (12.) 
common bread is not super-substantial bread, but this Holy 
Bread is super-substantial, that is, appointed for the substance 

of the soul. For this Bread goeth not into the belly and is cast Mat. 15, 

1 *7 

out into the draught, but is diffused through all thou art, for ,$;$,_ 
the benefit of body and soul. But by this day, he means, " 
" each day," as also Paul has said, While it is called to-day. Heb. 3, 

16. And forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors. 13 - 
For we have many sins. For we offend both in word and in * 
thought, and very many things do we worthy of condemn 
ation ; and if we say that we have no sin, we lie, as John i j hn 
says. And we enter into a covenant with God, entreating 1 8 - 
Him to pardon our sins, as we also forgive our neighbours 
their debts. Considering then what we receive and for what, 

let us not put off, nor delay to forgive one another. The 
offences committed against us are slight and trivial, and easily 
settled ; but those which we have committed against God are 
great, and call for mercy such as His only is. Take heed 
therefore, lest for these small and inconsiderable sins against 
thyself, thou bar against thyself forgiveness from God for thy 
most grievous sins. 

17. And lead us not into temptation, O Lord. Does then (14.) 
the Lord teach to pray thus, viz. that we may not be tempted 

at all ? And how is it said elsewhere, " the man who is not 
tempted, is unproved 1 ;" and again, My brethren, count it all Jam. 1, 
joy w/t en ye fall into divers temptations ; or rather does not 
the entering into temptation mean the being whelmed under 
the temptation ? For the temptation is like a winter-torrent 
difficult to cross. Some then, being most skilful swimmers, 
pass over, not being whelmed beneath temptations, nor 
swept down by them at all ; while others who are not such, 

c Evtoufiof is so explained by Jerome, Orth. iv. 13. Others to mean sufficient, 
who for the panem quotidianum of the old or necessary, vid. Theophylact. in Matt. 
Latin version, substituted panem super- vi. Basil. Keg. 1 ivv. -252. 
substantialem. Others explain the word d This is not in Scripture, but seems 
to mean fiitnrr or to couir, i. e. the new rather to be a proverb giving the sen?e 
or spiritual bread, the bread of the new of Scripture. It is referred to by Nazi- 
kingdom which is promised us. vid. anzen, (Ep. 215.) &c. Ed. Ben. 
Athan. de Incarn. 16. Damasc. de Fid. 



278 The )node qf communicating in the Body of Christ, 

LECT. entering into them sink in them. As for example, Judas 
XXIII 
Must. 5] entering into the temptation of covetousness, swam not 

through it, but sinking beneath it was choked both in body 
and spirit. Peter entered into the temptation of the denial ; 
but having entered it, he was not overwhelmed by it, but 
manfully swimming through it, he was delivered from the 
temptation. Listen again, in another place, to the company 
of unscathed saints, giving thanks for deliverance from tempt- 
IN. 66, ation, For Thou, God, hast proved us ; Thou hast tried us 
like a# silver is tried. Thou broughtest us into the net ; Thou 
laidest affliction upon our loins. Thou hast caused men to 
ride over our heads ; we went through fire and through water ; 
hut Thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place. Thou seest 
them speaking boldly, because they passed through and were 
not pierced. But Thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place ; 
now their coming into a wealthy place, is their being delivered 
from temptation. 

(15.) 18. But deliver m from the evil. If Lead us not into 
temptation had implied the not being tempted at all, He 
would not have said, But deliver us from the evil. Now the 
evil is the Wicked Spirit who is our adversary, from whom 
we pray to be delivered. Then, after completing the prayer, 
Thou sayest, Amen ; by this Amen, which means, " So be it," 
setting thy seal to the petitions of this divinely-taught prayer. 
19. After this the Priest says, " Holy things to holy men." 
(1(5 \ Holy are the gifts presented, since they have been visited by 
ir/po/m-the Holy Ghost; holy are you also, having been vouchsafed 
f, vui. t j ie jjoiy Ghost ; the holy things therefore correspond to the 
xxi. i. holy persons. Then ye say, " One is Holy, One is the Lord, 
Jesus Christ." For truly One is holy, by nature holy ; we 
too are holy, but not by nature, only by participation, and 
discipline, and prayer. 
(17.) 20. After this ye hear the chanter, with a sacred melody 
inviting you to the communion of the Holy Mysteries, and 
Ps.34,9. saying, O taste and sec that the Lord is good. Trust not the 
decision to thy bodily palate; no, but to faith unfaltering; for 
when we taste we are bidden to taste, not bread and wine, 
but the sigu e of the Body and Blood of Christ. 



O.JTITVITOU aup.a,ro(. vid. ahove, Leet. &lt;rv&lt;ro* of the Holy Ghostin Confirmation, 
xxi. 1. where oil is said to he ther&lt;- and xx. 6. where Baptism is said to he not 



&lt;ui(t in the Wood of Christ. The Thanksgiving. 27!* 

12. Approaching therefore, come not with thy wrists ex- (18.) 
tended, or thy fingers open ; but make thy left hand as if a 
throne for thy right, which is on the eve of receiving the King. 
And having hollowed thy palm, receive the Body of Christ, 
saving after it, Amen. Then after thou hast with carefulness 
hallowed thine eyes by the touch of the Holy Body, partake 
thereof; giving heed lest thou lose any of it; for what thou 
losest, is a loss to thee as it were from one of thine own 
members. For tell me, if any one gave thee gold dust, 
\vouldest thou not with all precaution keep it fast, being on 
thy guard against losing any of it, and suffering loss ? How 
much more cautiously then wilt thou observe that not a 
crumb falls from thee, of what is more precious than gold 
and precious stones ? 

2-2. Then after having partaken of the Body of Christ, (19.) 
approach also to the Cup of His Blood ; not stretching forth r t* v 
thine hands, but bending and saying in the way of worship 



and reverence, Amen, be thou hallowed by partaking also 
the Blood of Christ. And while the moisture is still upon thy r f- 
lips, touching it with thine hands, hallow both thine eyes and 
brow and the other senses. Then wait for the prayer, and 
give thanks unto God, who hath accounted thee worthy 
of so great mysteries. 

23. Hold fast these traditions unspotted, and keep your 
selves free from offence. Sever not yourselves from the Com 
munion; deprive not yourselves, by the pollution of sins, of 
these Holy and Spiritual Mysteries. And the God of peace \ These. 
Minctify you icholly ; and may your u-hole spirit, and soul, 5&gt; 23&gt; 
&lt;mil liudy he preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ: To whom be glory and honour and might, 
with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and 
world without end. Amen. 

only pardon and adoption, but also the however maintains that the word cannot 
iirlrvroi of the sufferings of Christ, vid. he applied to the elements after conse- 
Theod. luconfus. p. 125. Damascene cration. vid. de Fid. Orthod. iv. 13. fin. 



INDEX 



AARON called Christ, xvi. 13. type of 
Christ s priesthood, x. 1 1 . xii. 28. his rod 
blossoming as strange as Christ s birth, 
xii. 28. and suggests our resurrection, 
xviii.12. his forgiveness an encourage 
ment to the penitent, ii. 10. 

Abomination of desolation, iv. 15. xv. 9. 

Abraham justified not by works only but 
by faith, v. 5. perfected by faith, ib. 
Father of Christians, v. 6. his faith a 
type of ours, ib. example of reverence 
to God, vi. 3. beheld the Lord, xii. 
16. 

Adam, his creation as strange as Christ s 
birth, xii. 30. first and second Adam, 
xiii. 2. instance of the efficacy of re 
pentance, ii. 7. represented in his in 
nocence by the Baptized, xx. 2. 

Adoption of men to be sons of God, vii. 
7. by the Father s grace, through the 
Son and Spirit, ib. in Baptism, Introd. 
16. i. 2. iii. 14. xx. 6. not of necessity, 
but our free choice, vii. 13. Christ s 
Sonship not by Adoption, x. 4. xi. 7. 
(vide Son.) Spirit of Adoption, xvii. 5. 

Advent of Christ twofold, xv. 1. First in 
humiliation, ib. 

Second in glory from heaven, xv. 
1,3. foretold by Malachi, xv. 2. Ec- 
clesiastes, xv. 20. St. Paul, xv. 2. time 
unknown, yet to be expected, xv. 4. 
signs of it given us by Christ, ib. 

Object of our hope, xv. 1, 2, 33. 
not from the Earth, xv. 10. shall de 
stroy Antichrist, xv. 9, 12. changes 
accompanying it, xv. 3. shall bring in 
a new world, xv. 4. 

JEons of Valentinus, vi. 17. why said to 
be thirty, ib. 

Agabus, xiii. 29. xvii. 28. 

Ahab, instance of the efficacy of repent 
ance, ii. 13. 

Almighty, vide x. 5. note, denied of God 
by Greeks, viii. 1, 2. and Heretics, 
viii. 3. blasphemies against Him, 
viii. 8. 

Almsdeeds, fruits of repentance, and 
preparation for Baptism, iii. 8. 
iv. 37. taught by the Holy Ghost, 
xvi. 12. 



Altar of God, xxiii. 2. of the New Testa 
ment, xviii. 33. 

Ambition conquered through the Holy 
Ghost, xvi. 19. 

Angels made by God, iv. 4. made by 
Christ, xi. 23. their orders, iv. 16. 
xi. 12. have no equality with the 
Holy Ghost, xvi. 23. governed and 
sanctified by Him, iv. 16. xvi. 23. for 
given by God, ii. 10. vide note, fear 
ful to behold, ix. 1. xii. 14. but little 
known of them by us, xi. 12. 

Christ their Lord, x.lO.xii. 14. not the 
makers of the world, xi. 21, 22. know 
not God as He is, vi. 6. vii. 11. nor 
our Lord s generation, xi. 11, 12. 

Ministered to Christ, x. 10. present 
at Baptism, iii. 3. rejoice there, Introd. 
15. iii. 1, 3, 16. know its Seal, i. 3. 
(vide Seal. ) glory in the Cross, xiii. 

22. ministerat the judgment.xv. 19,22, 

23. innumerable there present, xv.24. 
^woifz^/g-of Christ,x.4, 14. eternally from 

the Father, ib. as God, xi. 15. with 
the Holy Ghost at His Baptism, xxi. 

I, 2. vide Chrism. 
Anthropomorphism, vi. 8. ix. 1. 
Antichrist, iv. 15. Christ s counterfeit, 

xv. 33. raised up by Satan to dis 
credit truth, xv. 11. a sorcerer, ib. 
Satan shall be in him personally, xv. 14, 
17. expected by the Jews, xii. 2. fore 
told by our Lord, xv. 9. St. Paul, ib. 
Daniel, xv. 13. signs of him, xv. 9, 18. 
by sorcery shall gain the Roman 
Empire, and deceive the Gentiles, xv. 

II, 12. the Eleventh King, xv. 12, 13. 
for three years and a half, xv. 12, 16. 
shall be received by the Jews as Christ, 
xv. 11, 12, 15. rebuild the temple, 
xv. 15. abhor idols, ib. first mild, then 
persecuting, xv. 12, 15. especially to 
the Saints, ib. shall pretend to miracles, 
xv. 13. shall be destroyed by Christ s 
Advent, xv. 9, 12. 

Martyrs under him most glorious, 
xv. 17. we must watch against him, 
xv. 18, 33. 

Antediluvians, instance of God s long-suf 
fering, ii. 8. 



282 



INDEX. 



Apelles, his heresy, iv. 20. note. 
Apocalypse, not reckoned in the Canon 

by S. Cyril, iv. 36. perhaps referred 

to, x. 3. xv. 27. vide note xv. 16. 
Apocryphal or doubtful books not to be 

studied, iv. 33, 35. proofs not drawn 

from them, xv. 16. 
Apostucy foretold by St. Paul, in S. 

Cyril s day, xv. 9. 
Apostles correspond to the Prophets, xiv. 

26. xvi. 4, 24. more favoured than 

they, xiv. 26. 

Holy Ghost in them, xvi. 3, 4, 9, 24. 

partially before Pentecost, x*ii. 12, 13. 

baptized fully at Pentecost, xvii. 14. 

18. supernaturally enlightened, xvi. 17. 
Witnesses of the Cross, xiii. 40. and 

Resurrection, xiv. 22. received power 

to forgive sins in the Holy Ghost, xiv. 

22. their deeds by Him, xvii. 21, &c. 
Send us to the Old Testament for 

proofs of Christ, xiv. 2. handed down 

the Scriptures to us, iv. 35. 

Typified by Joshua s twelve officers, 

x. 11. 

Apparel to be simple, iv. 29. 
Archelaus, a Bi&gt;hop of Mesopotamia, dis 
putes with Manes, vi. 27 30. 
Arlanixm ,iv . 7. x.5, 6, 9, 14. xi. 14. and 

SabeUianixin alike to be shunned, iv. 8. 

xi. 13, 16, 17. the falling away" 

spoken of by St. Paul, xv. 9. 
As far (is, vide Until. 
Ascension of Christ, iv. 13, 14. foretold by 

the Prophets, xiv. 24. compared with 

the translation of Enoch and Elias, 

xiv. 25. preceded the full gift of the 

Spirit, xvii. 12, 13. 
Astrologers, iv. 18. 
Azariah, xvi. 28. 



B. 



Babel, its confusion contrasted with 
the gift of tongues at Pentecost, 
xvii. 17. 

Banker , " be thou a faithful banker," 
vi. 36. 

Baptism, end of the Old Testament, be 
ginning of the New, iii. 6. of John, 
gave remission of sin, iii. 7. xx. 6. 
preceded by confession, ib. inferior to 
Christian Baptism, iii. 9. 

Of our Lord, sanctified ours, iii. 9, 
1 1. xii. 15. Holy Ghost descended on 
Him after it, xvii. 9 xxi. 1. in it He 
vanquished the Dragon in the waters, 
iii. 11. preparatory to His Temptation, 
and Ministry, iii. 13, 14. xxi. 4. 

Christian, offered to all, Tntr. 3, 4. 
n i. I, 2. a trial, xiv. 30. xvii. 36. not 
to be approached lightly, or hypocriti 
cally, Introd. 2 4. i. 3. (vide Faith, 
Hypocrisy, Purpose,} to the faithless a 



curse, Introd. 3, 4. like the parable of 
the Marriage Feast, Introd. 3. iii. 2. the 
impenitent though washed, not ac 
cepted, ib. 2, 4. xvii. 36. case of Simon 
Magus, Introd. 2. xvii. 35. preparation 
for it, Introd. 16. i. 6. iv. 37. during 
Lent, Introd. 4. i. 5. iv. 3. Catechis 
ing and Exorcisms, Introd. 9 14. i. 5. 
Repentance, Introd. 4. ii. 5, &c. iii. 
2, 7, 8. Confession, i. 2, 5. men must 
bring Faith, and look to God for more, 
Introd. 17. v. 9. not the purpose of 
Baptism, but evil motives to be laid 
aside, Introd. 4, 5. 

Given in the name of the Holy 
Trinity, iii. 3. xvi. 4, 19. Waters of 
Baptism, Introd. 16. iii. 3, 4. con 
tain Christ, Introd. 15. why by water, 
iii. 5. One, iv. 37. but once to be re 
ceived, Introd. 7. xvii. 36. by Heretics 
not Baptism, ib. Sanctified by our 
Lord s Baptism, iii. 9, 11. xii. 15. no 
salvation without it, iii. 4, 10. except 
to Martyrs, ib. 

Freely given to faith only, Introd. 8. 
i. 4. v. 10. conveys remission of sins, 
Introd. 8, 15, 16. iii. 15. to all equally, 
i. 5. xvii. 37. xviii. 20. the gift of the 
Holy Ghost, iii. 2, 4, 14, 16. iv. 16. 
but not equally to all, i. 5. xvii. 37. 

Glory and blessing of Baptism, 
Introd. 6, 15, 16. though despised by 
the world, ib. Regeneration, ib. i. 2. 
iii. 4. iv. 37. xx. 4. Illumination, xiii. 
21. Adoption, Introd. 16. iii. 14. xi. 9. 
called " Seal indelible," Intr. 17. 
(vide Seal.) transplants into spiritual 
Paradise, grafts in the Holy Vine, i. 5. 
xix. 9. xx. 7. imparts supernatural 
gifts, iii. 13. xvii. 37. Death of sin, 
new life, Introd. 5, 16. iii. 12. xx. 1. 
makes us members of Christ, xxi. 1. 
prepares for the resurrection, iv. 32. 
destroys the sting of death, iii. 11. 
Fellowship with Christ s sufferings, iii. 
12. xx. 5_7. called the "Gift," i. 6. 
ii.9. iii.2,4,5, 13, &c. of God, through 
men, xvii. 35, 36. Its twofold grace of 
Water and the Spirit, iii. 4, 16. inse 
parable, ib. typified by Circumcision, 
v. 6. to be diligently cherished, i. 4. 
xv. 26. xvii. 37. works after it re 
corded, xv. 23. 

Names of Candidates enrolled, 
Introd. 1, 4. i. 5. of the Baptized 
written in the book of the Living, xiv. 
30. many who fall away blotted out, 
ib. sins after it recorded against the 
Judgment, xv. 23. xviii. 20. 

Baptism of Martyrs in blood, iii. 10. 
xiii. 21. typified by the blood from our 
Lord s side, ib. 

Baptism of fire, xvii. 8. of the Holy 
Ghost, xvii, 12, 14. 



INDEX. 



283 



Administered by Bishops, Priests, 
or Deacons, xvii. 35. 

Rites previous to, xix. 2, Sec. Re 
nunciation of Satan and his works, 
ih. 2 9. Profession of Faith, xix. 9. 
symbolical putting off of garments, 
xx. 2. anointing with exorcised oil, 
\x. 3. Confession of the Trinity, xx. 4. 
Trine immersion, ib. symbolical of 
Christ s three-days burial, ib. our 
death and birth, ib. representation of 
Christ s sufferings, xx. 3 7. followed 
by the Chrism, xxi. vide Chrism. 

Baptism of the Manichees, vi. 33. 
Bap1htt:ry, xix. 2. 
Barnabas, his preaching in the Holy 

Ghost, xvii. 28. 
Barucfi, accounted in the Canon, iv. 35. 

quoted, xi. 15. 
llasilides, his heresy, vi. 17. 
Basilisk, ix. 14. 
Bath, of Baptism, not common water, 

Introd. 16. iii. 2. 

UeaftS) witnesses of God s power and 
glory, ix. 13. emblems of human tem 
pers, ib. in the Ark, xvii. 10. 
Bees, display God s power and wisdom, 
ix. 13. emblematical lessons to man, ib. 
Beginning, (,) only One the Father, 

xi. 14,20,23. 
Believer, vide Faithful. 
Bishops, ministers of Baptism, xvii. 35. 
order of, xvi. 22. xvii. 35. reverence 
due to them, iv. 35. first Bishop of 
Jerusalem, St. James i v - 28. xiv. 21. 
first fifteen of Jerusalem Hebrews, 
xiv. 15. Ancient Bishops settled and 
handed down the Canon, iv. 35. strife 
among them a sign of Antichrist, 
xv. 9. 

Birds i-hew forth God s glory, ix. 12. 
Binfi, Xew, Christ its author, xvii. 10. the 
gift of Baptism, vide Baptism t Regene 
ration. 

Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, dan 
ger of it, iv. 16. xvi. 1. 
Blood and water from Christ s side typi 
cal, iii. 10. xiii. 21. Baptism of Blood, 
iii. 10. river changed into it by Moses 
corresponds with the Passion, xiii. 21. 
blood of the Paschal Lamb, xix. 2, 3. 
blood not to be eaten, iv. 28. vide xvii. 
29. Blood of Christ, vide Eucharist. 
Body, work of God, not of the evil one, 
iv. 4, 22. viii. 3. xii. 26. vilified by 
Heretics, ib. instrument not cause of 
sin, iv. 23. true part of man, iv. 18, 
22. xv iii. 20. its excellence shews 
God s glory, ix. 15. to be cleansed by 
penitence, iv. 23. cleansed by the 
water of Baptism, iii. 4. yet may be 
uashed without the soul being en 
lightened, Introd. 2. of Christians, tem 
ple of the Holy Ghost, iv. 23. to be 



kept pure for its resurrection, iv. 26, 
30, xviii. 20. resurrection of, en 
couragement to holiness, xviii. 1. 
shewn from analogies of nature, &c. 
iv. 30. xviii. 6, &c. shares with the 
soul, as its deeds, so its reward, xviii. 
19. vide Resurrection. 

Christ s, (vide Incarnation, Man 
hood, ) a bait to Death, xii. 15. veil of 
His Godhead, xii. 26. typified by 
bread, xiii. 19. received under the 
figure of bread, xxii. 3. truly received 
in the Eucharist, xxii. 1 6. Christians 
made one with His body, and blood, 
xxii, 1 3. vide Euchari&t, Flesh. 

Book of life, names of the Baptized 
written in, xiv. 30. book of the Angels, 
iv. 24. our renunciation of sin recorded 
in God s Book, xix. 5. 

Bread, a prophetic symbol of Christ s 
body, xiii. 19. of the Eucharist, Christ s 
body, xxii. 1 6, 9. xxiii. 7. signified 
by the shew-bread, xxii. 5. Super- 
substantial bread, xxiii. 15. the Bread 
has respect to the body, the Word to 
the soul, xxii. 5. 

Breath of Christ gave power to forgive 
sin, xiv. 22. xvii. 12. and the Holy 
Ghost partially, xvii. 12. Breathing 
on Candidates for Baptism, Introd. 9. 
of Exorcism, xvi. 18. xx. 3. 

Burial of Christ, iv. 11. in the Earth to 
bless the Earth, xiii. 18, 35. xiv. 1 1. fore 
told by the Prophets, xiii. 34. xiv. 3. in 
a garden, xiv. 11. with Christ in Bap 
tism, Introd. 2. iii. 12. xx. 4, 5. 



C. 



Caiaphas, his desolate house a witness to 
the Cross, xiii. 38. 

Cain, an instance of God s mercy, ii. 7. 

Candidates for Baptism, &lt;fu*Tio/u.tv9t t 
Intr. 1. xi. 9. distinct from Catechu 
mens, and from Believers, Introd. 12, 
13. must bring a true heart, Introd. 
1 4. the careless or hypocritical must 
not forego Baptism but their sin, ib. 4. 
seriousness becoming their awful situ 
ation, ib. 13 15. 

Canon of Scripture settled and handed 
down by Apostlesand Ancient Bishops, 
iv 35. to be received from the Church, 
iv. 33. 

Carpocrates, his heresy, vi. 16. 

Ctitaphrygiaus or Montanists, xvi. 8. 

Catcchh uigs previous to Baptism, to be 
diligently attended, Intr. 9, 10. i. 5. 
their importance, ib.guard against error, 
ib. iv. 1 . planting, or building up of the 
Faith, Introd. 11. Creed their subject, 
ib. iv. 2, 3. not to be revealed to 
Catechumens or Gentiles, Introd. 12. 
v. end of Introd. Lect. 



204 



INDEX. 



Catechumen, meaning of the name, Intr. 
6. distinct from the Faithful, ib. i, 4. 
v. 1. not to be informed of mysteries, 
Intr. 12. nor of the Creed, v. 12. vi. 29. 

Catholic Church, vi. 2. xvi. 22. xvii. 29. 
xviii. 1. 

Meaning of the word, xviii. 23. The 
name a mark of the true Church, 
xvii. 26. to distinguish it from He 
retical assemblies, ib. 

Ceremonies of the Law abolished in the 
Church, xvii. 29. 

Cerinthus,\\\s heresy, vi. 16. 

Chaff mingled with water by^he Mani- 
chees, vi. 31. 

Chanting of Psalms, xiii. 26. xxiii. 20. 
imitation of Angels, xiii. 26. 

Charms forbidden, iv. 37. 

Chastity, iv. 24. taught by the Holy 
Ghost, xvi. 19, 22. 

Cherubim, ii. 17. ix. 3. 

Children, Song of the Three Children 
instance of Confession, ii. 16. 

Chrism, or Holy Ointment, typical of 
Christ s unction by the Holy Ghost, 
xxi. 1, 2. after the invocation of 
Christ s name, by the presence of His 
Godhead, conveys the Holy Ghost, 
xxi. 3. the gift of Christ, ib. symboli 
cally applied to the different parts of 
the body, xxi. 3, 4. gives the name 
of Christians, xxi. 1, 5. types of it in 
the Old Testament, xxi. 6, 7. to be 
kept unspotted, xxi. 7. prepares us 
for our conflict, xxi. 4. 

Christ, meaning of the word, x. 4, 11, 14. 
many so called typically, xi. 1. xxi. 1,2. 
Aaron, x. 11. xvi. 13. Saul and 
David, xvi. 13. Christians, xxi. 1. 
Name shared by the Baptized, xxi. 1. 
Christ Jesus the true Christ, x. 14. 
xi. 1. 

One, x. 3, 4. though with many 
titles, ib. His name separated by the 
Valentinians, vi. 17, 18. 

His twofold Nature in One Person, 
iv. 9. xii. 1. xv. 1. Son of God, 
and Son of David, xi. 5. 

God, iv. 7. very God, x. 6. xi. 9, 14. 
proved from the Prophets, xi. 15, &c. 
God of God, begotten, iv. 7. xi. 4, 
16, 18. Son of God, iv. 7. xi. I. 
vii. 1 , &c. xii. 24. (v. Son.) only-be 
gotten, iv. 7. vii. 4. (v. Only-begotten.) 
Eternally, xi. 4, 7, 8, 13, 17, 20. Un- 
originate, xi. 4, 5, 7. Partaker of the 
Father s Godhead, together with the 
Holy Ghost, vi. 6. (v. Trinity.} of the 
Father, xi. 14, 20. xiii. 14. begotten 
not made, xi. 14, 17, 19, 20, 21. 
(v. sirius.} Like in all things to the 
Father, iv. 7. xi. 4, 9, 18. not the 
same as the Father, xi. 17, 18. (v. Sa- 
bellius.) how subordinate to the Father, 



x. 9. how one with the Father, xi. 16. 
with the Father before His Incarna 
tion, x. 6, 8. 

Word Personal of the Father, iv. 8. 
xi. 10. Wisdom and Power of the 
Father, xi. 4. Maker of all things, by 
the will of the Father, iv. 7. x. 6. 
xi. 11, 12, 21 24. and their Lord, ib. 
(v. Lord.) His Throne Eternal, iv. 7. 
xi. 17. (v. Session, Throne.} Anointed 
Priest before all ages, x. 4, 14. xi. 1. 

As Creator so restorer of the world, 
vi. 11. only way to the Father, x. 1,2. 
God made man, xii. 3, 15. xiii. 33. 
truly made man, iv. 9. God dwelling 
with man, xi.3. Emmanuel, xi. 14. Son 
of David, xi. 5. xii. 23. His incarnation, 
its reasons, xii. 1 , ic. xiii. 33. (v. /wear- 
nation.) not a deified man, xii. 3. was 
with the old Fathers, x. 7. xii. 16. God 
seen in Him, xiv. 27. His various 
names, express His various offices, 
x. 3, 4, 11, 13, &c. 

Every thingconcerning Him written 
in the Prophets, xii. 16. xiii. 8. v. Lect. 
x. xv. passim, (v. Prophets.} Wit 
nesses of Him, x. 17 20. xiii. 38 
40. xiv. 22, 23. 

The glory of Baptism, iii. 9, 11. 
sanctified it, ib. xii. 15. preached 
not till Baptized, iii. 14. the Holy 
Ghost came upon Him, xvii. 9. xxi. 
2, 3. like but far higher than the 
Prophets, xiv. 26. alone sinless, ii. 10. 
iii. 11. xiii. 3, 5. His righteousness 
greater than our sin, xiii. 33. 

Died for us, xiii. 2. (v. Crucifixion^ 
Death.} truly, xiii. 4, 37. voluntarily, 
xiii. 3, 5, 6, 33. 

Delivered the old Fathers fror 
Hades, iv. 11. v. Hades. 

His appearances after the Resurrec 
tion, xiv. 11, 12. v. Resurrection. 

His ascension, xiv. 24. 

Sits at God s right hand, xiv. 27. 
present in the Church, xiv. 30. 

His second coming in glory, as His 
first in humiliation, xv. 1. (v. Advent.) 
warned us against being deceived about 
it, xv. 4. comes no more from the Earth, 
xv. 10. our Judge, xv. 25. His King 
dom shall have no end, xv. 26, 27. 

We are made partakers of Him by 
the Holy Chrism, xxi. 1, 6. and the 
Eucharist, xxii. f. v. Father, God, 
Jesus, Son, Trinity, Word. 
Christians, so called by the Holy Ghost, 
xvii. 28. partakers of Christ s name, 
x. 16. xxi. 1. honour of this, x. 20. 
the new name spoken of by the Pro 
phets, x. 16. 

Spread over the world, x. 16. xvi. 22. 
slandered through the crimes of here 
tics, xvi. 8. who falsely share their 



INDEX. 



285 



name, ib. vi. 12. to be especially perse- of the Seraphim ; 4iX0ym, xxiii. 0. 

cuted by Antichrist, xv. 12, 15. figures Confessors comforted by the Holy Ghost, 



of Christ, xxi. 1. 



xvi. 20,21. 



Church Catholic throughout the world, Consecration of the Bread mid Wine, 

xvi. 22. xviii. 23. (v. Kingdom.} go- xxiii. 7. 

verned and sanctified by the Com- Constantine, xiv. 22. 

forter, xvi. 14, 19, 22. xvii. 13. Continence, or Widowhood, lyx^etrtiu, 

Christ present in her assemblies, xiv. iv. 26. x. 19. xv. 23. 

30. ever present witness of Christ, xiii. Controversy an evil, though necessary, 

40. (v. Creed, Faith.} New Covenant ?i. 13. how to be engaged in, xiii. 22, 

established in her by the blessed 37. v. Heresy. 

Trinity, xvii. 29. Baptism plants in Cornelius though regenerated, yet bap- 

her, Intr. 17. xviii. 26. witness and tized with water, iii. 4. xvii. 27. 

keeper of Holy Writ, iv. 33, 35. Covenant New in the C hurch, xvii. 29. 

xv. 13. (v. Scripture.} her teaching of Noah and Moses not made without 

guard from error, iv. 1, 2. xi. 18. xii. water, iii. 5. 

17. xvii. 3. Covetousness conquered through the Holy 

Her order, Intr. 4, 13. contrasted Ghost, xvi. 19. 

with heresy, vi. 35, 36. reverence in Creation, how to be ascribed to the Father 

Church, Intr. 14, 15. due to her an- and Son, vi. 9. xi. 21, 22. of all 



cient Bishops from her children, iv. 
35. to be diligently attended before 
and after Baptism, i. 6. xviii. 28. 

meaning of the v\ ord i*xXj&lt;r/a, xviii. 
24, 25. Christian has succeeded the 
Jewish, ib. why called Catholic, ib. 
23, 26. her glories, xviii. 28. 

Falling away in it a sign of Christ s 
coming, xv. 7. makes way for Anti 
christ, xv. 9,18. existed in S. Cyril s 
day, ib lurking heretics in it, ib. 
Church of the Apostles, xvi. 4. of Gol 
gotha, xiv. 6. (v. Golgotha.} of the 
Resurrection, ib. adorned l&gt;y Kings, 



things by God denied by Heretics, 
iv. 4. of the world in spring-time 
answered by the Resurrection at the 
same time, xiv. 10. material creation, 
good in itself, marred by the creature, 
ii. 1. blasphemed by Manichees, vi. 31. 
God seen in it, ix. 2. glorifies Him, 
ix. 5, c. we know but little of it, 
ix. 13, 14. should teach us reverence 
to Him, ix. 16. 

Creator of all things God, iv. 4. vi. 7. 
not the author of evil, ii. 1, 4. blas 
phemed by Heretics, ix. 4. Creator of 
the world its Restorer, vi. 11. 



xiv. 9, 14. Constantine, ib. 22. Witness Creed, vrt&lt;rris, (v. Faith.) to be received 



of the Resurrection of the Lord, ib. 23. 

the last five Lectures delivered there, 

xviii. 33. 
Circumcision, a seal type of the seal of 

the Spirit in Baptism, v. 5, 6. of the 

Spirit, v. 6. 

Clement of Rome quoted, xviii. 8. 
Clouds shew God s glory, ix. 9. 
Comforter, not diverse from the Holy 

Ghost, xvii. 2. xvi. 3, 4. why so 



from the Church, v. 12. collected and 
proved from Scripture, ib. iv. 17. 
epitome of necessary doctrine for the 
weak, ib. provision for our way, ib. 
safeguard against error, iv. 2. vii. 1, 4. 
viii. 1. ix. 4. x. 4. xi. 1. xv. 2, 27. 
xvii. 3. xviii. 1. confutes Sabellius, 
xvii. 34. not to be written down, or 
divulged to Catechumens, v. 12. its 
Articles briefly expounded, iv. 



called, xvi. 20. governs and sanctifies Cross, chief boast of the Church Catholic, 



the Church, xvi. 22. Angels and 
Prophets, xvi. 23. abides for ever 
with the Faithful after Baptism, xvii, 
37. (v. Spirit.} Manes called himself 
the Comforter, vi. 25. xvi. 6, 9. and 
Montanus, xvi. 8. 

Communion in Christ s mysteries, i. 1. 
in the Holy Ghost given according to 
each man s faith, i. 5. Communion 
Service, xxiii. 1 , &c. 

Confettion, t^a^oXoytjir/?, v. ii. 15. note, 
before Baptism, i. 2, 5. takes away 
sin, as in David s case, ii. 11, 12. 
Hezekiah s, ib. 15. can quench fire, 



xiii. 1, 22. redeemed and enlightened 
the world, ib. we must not be ashamed 
of it, xiii. 3, 36, 37. glorified by the 
resurrection, xiii. 4. glory to Christ, 
xiii. 6. foretold by Jeremiah, xiii. 19. 
and Moses, ib. if an illusion, so is 
our salvation, xiii. 37. foundation of 
the Faith, xiii. 38. 

Sign of it to be used on all occa 
sions, iv. 14. xiii. 22, 36. scares 
devils, iv. 13. xiii. 3, 36. its power 
and virtue, xiii. 40. Christ s royal sign, 
iv. 14. xii. 8. trophy, xiii. 40. "Sign 
of the Son of Man," xiii. 41 . xv. 22. 



and tame lions, ib. 16. made before Cross, wood of it dispersed through the 
John s Baptism, iii. 7. by Martyrs, world, iv. 10. note. x. 19. xiii. 4. 

witness of Christ through the world, 
x. 19. of His real Passion, xiii. 4. 



iii. 10. 

of the Trinity in Baptism, xx. 4. 



280 



INDEX. 



Cross, Basilica of the Holy Cross, Pref. 

p. xxxii. v. Golgotha. 
Crown of thorns, signified the cancelling 

of Adam s curse, xiii. 17, 18. 
Crucifixion not in appearance, but real, 

iv. 10. xiii. 4. if an illusion, so is 

Salvation, xiii. 37. for our sins, iv. 

10. xiii. 3, 5, 33. its time the same as 

that of the descent of the Spirit, xvii. 

19. this and its other circumstances 

foretold, xiii. 24, &c. its witnesses, 

xiii. 38 40. 

The Crucijirtl, xiii. 3, 22, 23, 36, 40. 
Curiosity, about mysteries f Baptism 

fearful, Intr. 2, 4. iii. 7. 

To be limited by what is written, xi. 

12. xvi. I, 2. to give place to faith, xi. 

19, 20. 



D. 



Daniel, his power in the Holy Ghost, 
xvi. 31. prophesied of the Romans , 
xii. 18. xv. 13. of the time of the Mes 
siah, xii. 19. of Antichrist, XT. 9 16. 
explanation of his prophecy, ib. en 
dured not the sight of the Angel, xii. 
14. v. Confession. 

Darkness made by the author of Light, 
ix. 7. denied by heretics, ib. (v. Night.) 
of the Crucifixion foretold, xiii. 24. 

David, (v. Chiist, Spirit,) spake of 
Christ by the Holy Ghost, x. 15. xiv. 
28. Christ Ivs Son, and Heir of his 
throne, xii. 23. not the exclusive ob 
ject of the Psalms, ib. vii. 2. 

Saved by Confession, ii.10.yet refused 
not penitence, though forgiven, ii. 11. 

Deacons the first seven, firstborn children 
of the Church of Jerusalem, xvii. 24. 
may administer Baptism, xvii. 35. 

Dead, how Christ so called, x. 4. raised 
by Elijah and Elisha, xiv. 15, 16. by 
Christ without touching them, xiv. 16. 
in his name, witness His resurrection, 
xiv. 23. v. Resurrection, Judgment. 

Death, invisible whale of death, xiv. 17. 
brought by the First man, as Life by 
the Second, xiii. 2. v. xii. 15. doom of 
sins, xiii. 33. vanquished by Christ s 
death, xii. 15. xiv. 19. sting destroyed 
in Baptism, iii. 1 1. death in Baptism, 
Intr. 5. iii. 12. xx. 4. 

Of Christ real not illusory, xiii. 4. 
not for His sin, but ours, xiii. 5, 33. 
voluntary, ib. 6, 28. foretold by Him 
self, xiii. 6. God s sentence, and His 
mercy reconciled in it, xiii. 33. 

Demetrius of Phalerum, iv. 34. 

Descent into Hell, iv. 11. xiv. 19. 

Of the Spirit on Christ, how ex 
plained, xvii. 9. 



Despair, its evils, ii. 5. 

Devil, meaning of the word, ii. 4. the 
dragon, Intr. 16. apostate Serpent, iv. 
37. first work of God, viii.4. fallen Arch 
angel, ii. 4. viii. 4, impenitent, iv. 1. 
author of evil by this free choice, ii. 14. 
not the Lord of the world, viii. 6, 7. his 
envy against man, xii. 5. xix. 4. 
prompts not forces to sin, ii. 3, 4. iv. 
21, 37. men have freely chosen him 
their Father, vii. 13. knew not Christ, 
xii. 15. tries to prejudice truth by his 
counterfeits in idolatry, xv. 11. shall 
work personally in Antichrist, xv. 14. 
and war with the Martyrs, xv. 17. 
vanquished and cast out through the 
Holy Ghost, xvi. 19. endured by God 
that man may conquer him, viii. 4. 
watches the Candidates for Baptism, 
Intr. 16. renounced with his works in 
Baptism, xix. 2 9. what his works are, 
ib. pursues us to Baptism, xix. 2, 3. 

Devils tremble at the seal of Baptism, i. 
3. xvii. 35, 36. and the sign of the 
Cross, xiii. 3. possession by them fear 
ful, xvi. 15. power against them given 
by the Holy Ghost, xvi. 12, 22. ac 
knowledge Christ, while .Tews knew 
Him not, x. 15. lurked in our members 
till Bap ism, xx. 2. driven away by 
the Exorcised oil, xx. 3. 

Deration, end of religious knowledge, vi. 
7. xi. 12, 20. xvi. 1, 2. 

Diocese, xiv. 21. xvi. 22. v. qrajo/x/a. 

Dispensation, from the Father and the 
Son One, xvii. 5. v. oixotopia. 

Divination, to be shunned by Christians, 
iv. 37. 

Divisions in the Church make way for 
Antichrist, xv. 7, 9, 18. 

Doccta, iv. 9. vi. 14. xii. 3. 

Doctrines to be withheld from Catechu 
mens, Intr. 12. true, equally neces 
sary with good works, iv. 2. to be 
proved from Scripture, iv. 17. xii. 5. 
xiii. 8. (v. Faith, Scripture.} not fully 
comprehended by us, xi. 12, 19. xvi. 
1. fondness for ingenious rather than 
practical ones, an evil sign, xv. 9. 

Door, Christ, x. 1,3. 

Dove, why a symbol of the Holy Spirit, 
xvii. 9. of Noah, xvii. 10. 

Dragon, xii. 15. head of the Dragon, 
heresy, xv. 27. 

In the waters, Intr. 16. iii. 11. 



E. 



Earth freed from Adam s curse by Christ s 

burial, xiii. 18, 35. xiv. 11. 
East, symbolical turning towards it in 

Baptism, xix. 9. 



INDEX. 



287 



, xvii. 20. xviii. 33. season of 
Baptism, ih. 
Ehionitcx, \\. 16. xii. 4. 

/, Christ went there to destroy its 
Is, x. 10. His witness, x. 19. deliver 
ance from, typical of Baptism, xix. 3, 4. 
Elder, seventy Elders had the Holy 

Spirit, xvi. 25. 

Elijnh full of the Holy Spirit, xvi. 28. 
sa\v Christ in Sinai and Tabor, xii. 16. 
his raising the dead answers ohjections 
linst Christ s resurrection, xiv. 15. 
compared with it, ib. 16. his trans 
lation compared with Christ s ascen 
sion, xiv. 25. not so favoured as the 
Apostles, xix. 36. typical passing of 
Jordan, iii. 5. 

Ellshti full of the Holy Ghost, xvi. 28. 
supernaturally enlightened, ib. 17. his 
raising the dead, xiv. 15, 16. com 
pared with Christ s, ib. 

iheth full of the Holy Ghost, xvii. 7. 
Emmanuel, v. Immanucl. 
End of the world not end of Christ s 

kingdom or person, xv. 27 32. 
Enlighten, said of Baptism, Intr. 1. xiii. 
21. Simon Magus not enlightened 
though baptized, Intr. 2. the Holy 
Ghost enlightens, xvi. 16 18. xvii. 
13. v. Illuminate. 

Ew&lt;Vj/, there is a righteous enmity, vi.35. 
xvi. 10. against blasphemers of God, 
taught by the world s wonders, ix. 16. 
Einsti.-:: of St. Paul final seal of the Scrip 
ture, iv. 36. why most numerous, x. 18. 
their completeness and variety of teach 
ing about the Holy Ghost, xvii. 34. 
Epixtle of the Apostles on the observ 
ance of the Jewish Law by Gentiles, 
iv. 28. xvii. 29. Universal, ib. 
Eternity of the Son of God, xi. 20. of 
His generation, iv. 7. of His Priest 
hood, x. 14. of His throne, xiv. 27. 
Ethiopia, Church there, xvi. 22. taught 

by the Eunuch, xvii. 25. xvi. 14. 
Eucharist, Christ s blessed gift, xiii. 6. 
The Body and Blood of the Lord 
truly there, xxii. 1,2. under the figure 
of Bread and Wine, xxii. 3. The 
Bread and Wine after invocation not 
simple elements, but the Body and 
Blood of Christ, xix. 7. xxii. 2, 6, 9. 
xxiii. 7. not bread and wine, but the 
sign of Christ s Body and Blood, 
\ ,iii. 20. analogy of Idol-sacrifices, 
xix. 7. of the Holy Chrism, xxi. 3. 
we must not judge by sense of this 
mystery, xxii. 6, 9. but believe that 
we have received Christ s Body and 
Blood, ib. 1 6. xxiii. 20. a spiritual 
mystery, xxii. 4, 8. 

The Bread and Wine after the in 
vocation of the Holy Trinity, xix. 7. 



made the Body and Blood of Christ, 
xxiii. 7. sanctified and changed by the 
Holy Ghost, ib. gifts hallowed by the 
Holy Ghost, xxiii. 19. 

Spiritual Sacrifice of propitiation, 
xxiii. 8, 9. supplications after it for 
the Living, ib. 8. and the Dead, 
xxiii. 9. 

The Super-substantial Bread, xxiii. 
15. nourishment of Soul and Body, ib. 
xxii. 5. 

Typified by the Shew-Bread, xxii. 
5. foretold by David, ib. 7. arid Ec- 
clesiastes, ib. 8. 

By it we bear Christ in us, xxii. 3. 
Mode of Communicating in Christ s 
Body, xxiii. 21. and Blood, xxiii. 22. 

Eve a virgin in Paradise, xii. 5. death 
through her, as through Mary, life, xii. 
15. her birth as strange as our Lord s, 
ib. 29. 

Evil the creature s work, not the Cre 
ator s, ii. 1. evil God believed by the 
Manichees and Gnostics, vi. 12, 13. 
physical evil, ix. 14. 

Exercise, a&lt;rxti&lt;rts, previous to Baptism, i. 
5. iii. 7. 

Exorcisms previous to Baptism, Intr. 9. 
expel evil spirits, -ib. cleanse the soul, 
ib. collected from the Scriptures, ib. to 
be diligently attended, i. 5. power 
through the Holy Ghost, xvi. 19, 22. 

Exorcised oil, xx. 3. 

Ezckiel saw but the likeness of God s 
glory, ix. 1. his vision, ix. 3. pro 
phecy of Baptism, iii. 16. xvi. 30. 



F. 



Faith t ground and bond of human action, 
v. 3. principle of holiness, v. 4, 7. exem 
plified in Abraham, v. 5. powerof faith, 
ii. 16. v. 7, 8. in one man for another, 
v. 8, 9. partly our own, but chiefly 
God s gift to those who ask, v. 9. two 
kinds of faith; one, our assent to doc 
trines ; saves at once, v. 10. another, 
a gift of the Spirit ; reward of the for 
mer, working miracles, v. 11. 

Alone wanted to cure our worst sins, 
ii. 6. in Baptism, i. 1. v. 2. xvii. 35. 
necessary to our New Birth, i. 2. iii. 1. 
enables us to receive the gift of Bap 
tism, v. 6. purifies the soul, iii. 2. 
makes sons of God, vii. 13. without 
works saved the robber, v. 10. xiii. 31 . 
God can give faith to the faithless if he 
but asks, Intr. 17. v. 9. To be tried by 
false miracles as well as persecution, 
xv. 17. and by false doctrine, xiii. 37. 

Faith, ftfns, i.e. the Creed one, Intr. 
7. xvi. 4, 24. delivered by the Church 



288 



INDEX. 



and proved from Scripture, iv. 17. v. 

12. guard against error, iv. 2. outline 
of teaching, iv. 3. v. 1. note. xiv. 24, 
27. a deposit, and treasure, v. 13. v. 
Creed. 

Faithful, i. e. Baptized Christians, Intr. 

13. dignity of the title, Intr. 6. v. 1, 
2. new name given in Baptism, i. 4. 
must not presume, ii. 3. 

Fall of Adam corresponded to in its cir 
cumstances by the Passion, xiii. 19. 

Fasting taught by the Holy Ghost, xvi. 
12. means towards salvation, ii. 9. 
preparatory to Baptism, iii." 7. part of 
repentance, ib. 16. v. 37. David s, ii. 

12. reason of fasting, iv. 27. those who 
cannot not to be despised, ib. fast of 
the Preparation, xviii. 17. v. Meats. 

Fatalism of heretics, iv. 18 20. vii. 13. 
Fate not cause of sin, iv. 18 21. vii. 13. 

nor of our Sonship to God, vii. 13. 

God not subject to it, iv. 5. 
Father, One God the Father, vii. 1. xi. 

13. to be included in our notion of 
God, vi. 1. Father, by the Son, with 
the Holy Ghost bestows all things, xvi. 
4, 24. xviii. 28. (v. Trinity. } One in 
glory with the Son and Holy Ghost, 
vi. 1. the God of the Old Testament, 
vii. 6. Maker of the World, ib. through 
the Son, vi. 9. xi. 11, 12, 2124. 

The Father in respect of the Son, 
vii. 1 3. viii. 1. as opposed to Jew 
ish unbelief, vii. 2. properly and by 
nature the Father of Christ, iv. 4. vi. 1 . 
vii. 5, 7, 10. how He begat the Son, 
He, with the Son and Holy Ghost, 
alone knows, xi. 8, 1 1. we know but 
negatively, ib. heresies as to how 
God is Father, vi. 6. vii. 5. xi. 4, 
7 10. 14, 18. not changed into the 
Son, xi. 13, 17, 18. distinct, yet not 
to be separated from the Son, iv. 8. 
(v. Arin.v, Sdbellius.) suffered not f &gt;r 
us, xi. 17. Father from Eternity, vii. 

5. xi. 4, 8. never not the Father, iv.5. 
vii. 5, 11. The beginning (ri v- 
**.) of the Son, xi. 14, 20. xiii. 23. 
apart from time, xi. 20. in the Son, xi. 
17. one with the Son, xi. 16. called by 
the Son His God, xi. 18. fountain of life, 
and good, vi. 9. xi. 18, 20. xviii. 29. 
worshipped through, xi. 17. xii. 15. 
and with the Son, x. 1,2. only known 
to the Son, and Holy Ghost, vi. 6. vii. 
11. ix. 1, 2.xi.l2. revealed by the Son, 
through and with the Holy Ghost, vi. 

6. x. 1. seen only in the Son, x. 7, 8. 
xi. 18. xiv. 27. v. Angels. 

How called " My Father by Christ, 
vii. 7. xi. 18, 19. 

Father of men by adoption, vii. 8. 
by faith, and their own choice, vii. 13. 



in Baptism, xi. 9. inconceivable ho 
nour for man to have God for his 
Father, vii. 12. xxiii. 11. 

Other metaphorical senses of the 
word, vii. 8 10. 

Satan chosen by men for their fa 
ther, vii. 13. 

Father, earthly fathers receive their 
prerogative from the Heavenly Father, 
vii. 3. to be honoured by the Sons of 
God, vii. 15. duty to them, the first 
Christian duty, vii. 15, 16. 
Fathers of the Old Testament delivered 
by Christ from Hades, xiv. 19. foun 
tains of truth to us, xvi. 1 1 . 
Fig-tree cursed for the sake of the type, 

xiii. 18. 
Figure, rvros, Bread and Wine of Christ s 

Body and Blood, xxiii. 3. 

Figure, avrirvvrev, Baptism, of Christ s 

sufferings, xx. 6. Chrism, of the 

Anointing of the Holy Ghost, xxi. 1. 

Bread and Wine, xxiii. 20. 

Fire, Exotcism compared to it, Introd. 9. 

Baptism of, xvii. 8. of the Holy Ghost 

like it, xvii. 12, 14. fiery tongues at 

Pentecost, xvii. 15. opened Paradise, 

which the fiery sword had guarded, ib. 

First-born, Christ in an exclusive sense, 

xi. 4. Israel so called, ib. 
Fishes shew God s glory, ix. 11. 
Fleth framed by God, xii. 26. not unholy 
as heretics say, ib. Christ not ashamed 
of it, ib. hallowed by our Lord s incar 
nation, xii. 15. His weapon to conquer 
the devil, and death, ib. His flesh the 
veil of his Godhead, xii. 26. xiii. 32. 
" eating the flesh of Christ," not un 
derstood spiritually by the Jews, xxii. 4. 
Flowers, their varied beauty shew forth 

God s glory, ix. 10. 

Forgiveness of sins, Christ s free gift, ii. 
15. power of conferring it granted to 
the Apostles, xiv. 22. xvii. 12. how 
typified, xv. 21. 

Of injuries required in Baptism, i. 
6. case 6f David and Shimei, ii. 11. 
Even Angels forgiven, ii. 10. 
Forgiveness of injuries required 
from sinners in the Holy Communion, 
xxiii. 16. v. Remission, Sin. 
Fornication defiles the temple of the Holy 

Ghost, iv. 23. 
Freedom of the soul, ii. 1, 2. iv. 18, 21. 



G. 



Gabriel, his appearance too bright for 
Daniel, xii. 14. Messenger to the 
blessed Virgin, xvii. 6. witnessed of 
the endless kingdom of Christ, xv. 27. 

Galatia, heresy of Marcellus arose there, 
xv. 27. 



INDEX. 



2H9 



Garment of incorruption, xv. 26. uf Sal 
vation, xix. 10. puttingoff of garments 
in Baptism, xx. 2. 
Caul, the Church there, xvi. 22. 
Generation of Christ twofold, xi. 5. xv. 1. 
His Divine generation spiritual, xi. 5, 
7, 8. mysterious, xi. 7, 8. not meta 
phorical, xi. 9. not as mind hegets 
thought, xi. 10. incomprehensible, iv. 
7. known to no creature, xi. 11, 13. 
only to the Holy Ghost, xi. 12. de 
clared only negatively by the Church, 
xi.ll. not tobeexaminedbut believed, 
xi. 19, 20 eternal, iv.7. withoutbe- 
ginning, vii. 4. xi. 4, 5, 7, 1 9. timeless, 
xi. 7,8,14, 17, 20. v. Fatter, Son. 
Gelhsemanc, x. 19. 
Ghost, Holy. v. Spirit. 
Gift, name of Baptism, i. 6. heavenly gift 
ii. 20. Gifts of the Father, Son, and 
Holy Ghost, same, xvi. 24. v. Baptism. 
Chrism, gift of Christ, xxi. 3. 
Gifts of the Eucharist, hallowed by 
the Holy Ghost, xxiii. 19. 
Glory of Christ, eternal, as God, in time, 

as crucified, xiii. 6. 

Gnostics, their heresies about the genera 
tion of the Son, vii, 5, note, against the 
Holy Ghost, xvi. 4, 7. separated the 
two Testament , xvi. 4. abhorred flesh 
and wine, iv. 27, note.v. iv.20, 22. 
God, (v. Creator i Father, Trinity, ) know 
ledge of Him foundation of religion, 
iv. 4. ignorance about Him source of 
heresy and idolatry, iv. 6. viii. 1. 

One, iv, 4. vi. passim, viii. 1, 8. xi. 
17. unoriginate, unchangeable, iv. 4,5. 
vi. 7. one first principle, vi. 12, 13, 36. 
xi. 28. incorporeal, vi. 7, 8. ix. 1. uni 
form in substance, vi. 7. like to Him 
self, vi. 7. infinite, iv. 5. vi. 8. viii. 2. 
incomprehensible, vi. 2, 4, 7. even to 
angels, vi. 6. to all but the Son and 
Spirit, ib. x. 1. unspeakable in begin 
ning, form, nature, vi. 7. yet we must, 
not indeed declare, but glorify Him, 
as far as we know, vi. 5. ix. 3, 16. our 
best knowledge to know our ignorance 
of Him, vi. 2. invisible, ix. 1, 2. seen 
partially by angels, vii. 11. to man in 
Christ, x. 6, 7, 8. xii. 16. xiv. 27. 
dimly in His works, ix. 2, &c. 

Both Just and Good, iv. 4. vi. 7. 
and full of all perfection, vi. 7,8, 9. 
Father of Christ, vii. 5. Maker of all 
things, iv. 4. ix. 1, &c. &gt;f darkness as 
well as light, ix. 7. Almighty, and 
Sovereign over all things, though 
long-suffering, viii. 1, &c. is in all 
things, vi. 8, 9. all things serve Him, 
save the Son and Spirit, viii. 5. 

Forsaken by idolaters, vi. 10, 11. xii. 
5, &c. His great mercy, ii. 7, 10. par- 
donsworst of sinners who believe,ii.5,6. 



Present in Baptism, Intr. 15. 
Lord both of soul and body, iv. 4 
22. viii. 3. 

Blasphemed by heretics, vi. 12. viii. 
8.Mx. 16. not two Gods, vi. 13. viii. 3. 
not the soul of the world, viii, 2. 
various heresies concerning Him,iv.4, 
5. vi. 14, &c. 

" God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob," 
xviii. 11, 12. 

God of God, iv. 7. (v. Christ.) made man, 
xi. 15. xii. 3. xiii. 33. 

" God of this worldS lhe words perverted 
by Manes, vi. 28. how explained by 
Archelaus, and S. Cyril, vi. 28, 29. 

God the Son ,theWord,xii.3.v. Christ, Soil. 

God, the Holy Ghost, v. Spirit. 

Golgotha, St. Cyril s first xviii Lectures 
spoken in the Church there, iv. 10. xiii . 
22. vide xviii. 33. name typically pro 
phetic of Christ, xiii. 23. witness of the 
Crucifixion, iv.10, 14.x. 19. xiii. 4,39. 

Gospel, only four genuine, iv. 36. forged 
ones, ib. Manichaean Gospel according 
to Thomas, iv. 36. vi. 31. our Gospels 
attested by the Old Testament, xiv. 2. 
that according to S. Matthew written 
in Hebrew, xiv. 15. 

All may hear, but not understand the 
Gospel, Intr. 6. vi. 29. 

Phrase " in the Gospel," Iv tu&yyt- 
\iets, vi. 4, 7. xiii. 21, 35. 

Grace, God s to give, ours to use, i. 4, 
necessary that we may receive the 
truth, xvi. 2. requires honesty and 
faith, i. 3. to be received and che 
rished, xvii. 37. given through Christ 
at the New Birth, i. 2. 
Gift of grace, ii. 9. 
Spirit of grace, xvii. 5. 

Greeks, dangerous because of their plausi 
ble words, iv. 2. deny the resurrection, 
xviii. 1. limit God s power, viii. 2. 
believe things as hard as Christ s 
birth, xii. 27. to be silenced out of 
their own fables, xiii. 37. to be an 
swered by reasoning, as the Jews by 
Scripture, xviii. 10. their shameful 
idolatry, iv. 6. vi. 11. 



H. 



Habakkuk, carried by the angel to Daniel, 
xiv. 25. compared with Christ, ib. 

Hades, v. Hell. 

Hands of Christ stretched on the Cross 
typical, xiii. 27, 28. laying on of, con 
veys the Spirit in both Testaments, 
xvi. 26. 

Head, v. xiii. 23. 

Heatftcnisrn counterfeits truth to discredit 
it, xv. 11. v. Idolatry. 

Hearers, danger lest they receive false 
impressions of truth, xvi. 2. 

U 



290 



INDEX. 



Heavens, vi. 3. the abode of angels, iii, 5. 
made of water, ib. ix. 5. Heaven dis 
tinguished from the Third Heaven, xiv. 
26. its wonders shew God s glory, ix. 5. 
shall perish but be renewed, xv. 3. 
Christians, a heaven, xxiii. 11. 
Hell, Christ descended thither to redeem 

the just, iv. 11. xiv. 19. 
Herbs, men changed into them, who 
plucked them, according to Manes, 
vi. 31. 

Heresy, manifold, ir. 2. vi. 13. xvii. 33. 
xviii. 1. contrasted with the Church, 
vi. 35. a knowledge of it neoessary, vi. 
34. xvi. 5. yet an evil, vi. 13, 33. 
arising from presumption, xi. 12. from 
a mistaken thought of honouring the 
Father or the Son, xi. 17. v. x. 2. not 
to be curiously inquired into, vi. 19. 
Heresies, alluded toby S. Cyril: of Apel- 
les ; Arius; Basilides; Carpocrates; 
Cataphrygians; Cerimhus; Doceta? ; 
Ebionites; Gnostics; Manes; Marcel- 
lus ; Marcion; Menander; Montanus; 
Noetus; (iv.8.note.)Paul of Samosata; 
(iv. 8.x. 5. xii. 4. xiv. 27.) Sabellius; 
Simon Magus ; Valentinus. 
Heretics perverted Holy Scripture, iv. 19. 
vi. 27. their assemblies to be shunned, 
iv. 37. how to be treated, vi. 36. to be 
avoided, xvi. 6. why they should be 
hated, xvi. 10. falsely called Chris 
tians, vi. 12. on whom they brought 
discredit, xvi. 8. blasphemous to God, 
xi. 16. a sign of Christ s coming, xv. 
5. formerly manifest, now lurking in 
the Church, xv. 9. divided attributes 
into persons, iv. 4. x. 1, 3. xvii. 2. 
Hennas a disciple of Manes, vi. 31. 
Hezekiah shewed the efficacy of Confes 
sion, ii. 15. not the object of Isaiah s 
prophecy of Immanuel, xii. 21, 22. 
Hiffh Priest, reason of his bathing, iii. 5. 
Christ our High Priest, x. 4, 5, 11, 14. 
xii. 28. 

Holiness, all through the Holy Ghost, iv. 
16. Faith, its ground, v. 4. Spirit of, 
xvii. 5. v. Sanctification. 
Hope support to Candidates for Baptism, 

Intr. 9, 10. 

Hour, third, that of the Crucifixion, and 
of the descent of the Spirit at Pente 
cost, xvii. 19. of the Crucifixion fore 
told, xiii. 24, 25. 

Human conceptions not to be intruded 
into the mysteries of the Go-pel, xi. 7,8. 
Human nature of, our Lord. v. Incar 
nation. 
Hyssop, symbolical, iii. 1. 

I. 

Idols, offerings to, become polluted by the 
invocation of the idol s name, iii. 3. 
xix. 7. not to be touched, iv. 28. 



Idolatry, worship of God s gifts, vi. 10. 
its madness, iv. 6. and degradation, 
vi. 10, 11. will be abhorred by Anti 
christ, xv. 15. 

Ignorance of all creatures concerning 
God, vi. 2 6. xi. 11. check to pre 
sumption, not to praise, vi. 5. should 
repress our curiosity, xi. 11. know 
ledge of it our highest wisdom, vi. 2. 
of what is written should make us 
silent about what is not written, xi. 
12. xvi. 1. and guarded in speaking, 
xvi. 1. 

Illuminated, Intr. 1, 2. xviii. 33. alone 
know the glory of the Gospel, vi. 29. 

Illumination of the just by the Holy 
Ghost, xvi. 3, 11. its power, xvi. 16 
18. same as Baptism, Qurirpet, xiii. 21. 

Image, Christ the true Image of God to 
subvert the false one, xii. 15. man, 
God s image, xii. 5. soul, made in 
God s image, iv. 18. meaning of the 
" Image of God," xiv. 10. " our 
Image, "argument from the words, x. 6. 

Immortality of the soul, God s gift, iv. 18. 

Immanuel 9 prophecy of, xii. 3, 21, 22. 
meaning of the word, xi. 1 i. 

Impersonal, (a.vvr oirrttTas^) words, iv. 8. 

Incarnation of our Lord, real not illu 
sory, iv. 9. xii. 3. salvation depends 
on its reality, xiii. 4. denied by Simon 
Magus, vi. 14. v. xii. 31. 

Must be believed as well as Christ s 
Godhead, xii. I. heretical and infidel 
objections a priori, from its needless- 
ness, xii. 4. reasons for it, vi. 11. 
Creator of the world its Restorer, ib. 
to restore man, xiii. 5. proved from 
the prophets, xiii. 8, &c. that man 
might see God, x. 7. xii. 13, 14. to 
sanctify the waters ; that God might 
be worshipped ; that man might be 
made partaker of God ; that the Lord 
might suffer for us, xii. 15. objection to 
its possibility, xii. 4. answered, xii. 
2730. 

Christ Lord and God before it, x. 6, 
12. xi. 20. of a Virgin, iv. 9. xii. 2, 5, 
21 . why, xii. 25, 33, 34. blasphemies of 
heretics respecting it, ib. xii. 31. with 
out taint because of the Holy Ghost, 
xii. 29, 32. xvii. 6. signs of its time, 
place and manner given by the Pro 
phets, xii. 5, 10 12, 17 24. implied 
in the histories of Abraham, Jacob, 
Moses, and Elias, xii. 16. witnesses 
of it, xii. 32, 33. 

Satan s counterfeits among idolaters 
to discredit it, xv. 11. 

Indians, converts to the Church, xvi. 22. 

Inspiration contrasted with possession by 
devils, xvi. 15, 16. 

Interpretation of Scripture, xiii. 9. gift of 
the Spirit, xvi. 12. v. Scripture. 



1NDKX. 



Interpreter, viii. 7. xiii. 21. xvi. 6. vide 
xv. 13. 

Invocation of the Holy Trinity gives a 
sanctifying power to the water of 
Baptism, iii. 3. to the exorcised oil, 
xx. 3. analogy of the invocation of the 
idols name on offerings to them , iii. 3. 
xix. 7. of Christ on the Holy Ointment, 
causes it to convey the Holy Ghost, 
xxi. 3. of the most Holy Trinity on 
the Bread and Wine, xix. 7. makes 
them the Body and Blood of Christ, 
xxiii. 7. 

Ireiiceus quoted, xvi. 6. 

Isaiah prophesied of Christ, xii. 2. of 
his birth of a virgin, xii. 2. this ex 
plained, ib. 21, 22. beheld Christ, xiv. 
27. and in the Spirit foresaw His 
coming, xiii. 3. witness of his inno 
cence, ib. foreknowledge given him by 
the Holy Ghost, xvi. 18. 
Sawn asunder, ii. 14. xiii. 6. 



J. 



Jacob saw the Lord, xii. 16. prophesied 
of the time of His coming, ib. 17. 

Jeremiah, his prophecy of the Lord s 
sufferings, xiii. 7. of gentile faith, ib. 

Jericho, x. 1 1 . 

Jerusalem, its exclusive privileges, iii. 7. 
xiii. 22. xvi. 4. xvii. 13. Christian 
opposed to Jewish, xiii. 7. St. .lames 
its first Bishop, iv. 28. xiv. 21. first 
fifteen Bishops Hebretvs, xiv. 15. 

Jctrit, so named because He save?, x. 1 1 , 
12, 13. and heals us, x. 4, 13. mean 
ing in Hebrew, and Greek, x. 12, 13. 
Joshua a type of Him in His kingly 
office, x. 11. (v. Christ.} His name 
hinted at by the Prophets, x. 12. not 
moredistinctlybecauseoftheJews,x.l2. 

Jews study and knowthe Scriptures with 
out understanding them, iv.2. xii. 13. 
to be silenced from the Prophets, xiij. 
37. xviii. 10. despise the testimony of 
the Prophets in rejrcting the Lord, vii. 
2. x. 2. xii. 2. xiv. 15. deny that Jesus 
is Christ, x. 14. while devils acknow 
ledge Him, x. 15. 

Misinterpret the Prophets, xii. 21, 
22. infidel objections to the Incar 
nation, xii. 4, 27. absurdly apply the 
prophecies of Christ s eternal kingdom 
to men, vii. 2. gainsay our Lord s 
sufferings, xiii. 7. their subjection to 
Rome a proof that Christ is come, xii. 
17. vain attempt to discredit the Re 
surrection, xiv. 14. their objections 
confuted by the examples of Elijah 
and Elisha, xiv. 15. 

Their Patriarchs, xii. 17. 
Are looking for Antichrist, xii. 2. 
will receive him, xv. 11, 12, 15. will 

U 



be favoured by him, xv. 15. thc-ir ob 
servances and sabbaths to be shunned, 
iv. 37. 

Job had the Holy Ghost, xvi. 27. 

St. John Baptist his high office, bap 
tism, and character, iii. 6. (v. Bap 
tism.} link between the twocovenants, 
x. 19. delivered from Hades and death 
by Christ, iv. II. xiv. 19. 

Sanctified by the Holy Ghost to 
baptize Christ, xvii. 8. 

St. John the Divine, xii. 1. 

Jonah a type and proof of Christ s resur 
rection, xiv. 17. compared with Christ, 
xiv. 17, 18. in the whale, a type of 
Christ in Hades, xiv. 20. his prayer 
fulfilled only in Christ, ib. 

Jordan, typical, iii. 5. x. 11. xiv. 25. 

Joseph, his ill-treatment turned to good 
by God s providence, vii. 4. full of the 
Holy Ghost, xvi. 27. 

Joseph, how called the Father of Christ, 
vii. 9. not really so, xii. 3, 31. 

Judas, xiii. 6. his treason foretold, xiii. 9. 
meaning of the name, ib. explanation 
of Zechariah s prophecy relating to 
him, ib. 10, 11. 

Judge, Chri&lt;t, of quick and dead, xv. 26. 

Judgment, day of, xv. 2 1 . its glories and 
terrors, xv. 22, 26. hope of the poor 
and desolate, xv. 23. God and all 
Angels present, xv. 24. How Christ 
bids us prepare for it, xv. 26. 

Judgment of our Lord by His people, 
a sign foretold, xii. 12. xiii. 12. 

Just, " the Just" delivered by Christ 
from Hades, v. Hell. 

illuminated by the Holy Ghost, xvi. 
3,27. 

The Just God blasphemed by Here 
tics, iv. 4. 

Justification given in Baptism, Intr. 16. 
i. 4. of Abraham by faith, vi. 5. 
even by riches, viii. 6. 



K. 



Keys of Heaven given to S. Peter, xiv.26. 

Kiiigs reign through God, viii. 5. in the 
latter days honour the Gospel, xiv. 14. 
taught by the Church, xvii. 10. 

Kingdom of Christ, universal : foretold 
by Daniel, xii. 18. without bound, 
xii. 24. unwittingly acknowledged in 
the soldiers mockery, xiii. 17. never 
to end, iv. 15. xv. 27. heresy of 
Marcellus regarding it, ib. &c. 

God s kingdom, in the Lord s Prayer, 

xxiii. 23. 

Four great kingdoms, xv. 13. king 
dom of Antichrist, xv. 12, 13. 

Kiss of Peace, xxiii. 3. 

Knowledge not for curiosity but devotion, 
v i. 5, 7. supernaturally given by the 

2 



292 



INDEX. 



Holy Ghost, xvi. 16. in the Aposlles 
and Prophets, ib. 17, 18. 



L. 



Lamentations of Jeremiah refer to the 
second captivity of the Jews. xiii. 7. 

" Lamp" meaning of in Psalm 132, x. 15. 

Laver of Baptism, (Xoyrgov,) Intr. 2, 7. 
1 ]. i. 2. iii. 3, 5. iv. 32. v. 6, &c. one 
salvation of the Laver, iv. 37. of Re 
generation, xix. 10. repentance of the 
Laver, iv. 32. Laver UOWTJ^,} in the 
Tabernaclenn emblem of Baptism, iii. 5. 

Latv, inspired by the Holy Ghost, iv. 16. 
blasphemed by heretics, iv. 33. ful 
filled in Christ, iv. 33. xiii. 5. its cere 
monies now abrogated by the Holy 
Trinity in the Church, xvii. 29. our 
schoolmaster, iv. 33. 

Lazarus, his resurrection an earnest of 
our deliverance from sin, ii.5. and re 
surrection, xviii. 16. raised through 
the faith of others, v. 9. 

Lent, preparation for Baptism during it, 
iv. 3. xviii. 32. v. Bujfiiwi. 

lessons from Scripture, Intr. 4. iv. 1. 
xiv. 24, &c. guard against error, iv. 1. 
mark canonical books, iv. 33, 36. 

Lihyniis in the Church, xvi. 22. 

Life, the Father is true Life, xviii. 29. 
given us in Baptism by Him who is 
Life, iii. II, 12. Christ, who is Life, 
brought Life, as Adam Death, xiii. 2. 
(v. Eve, Tree.} Eternal Life God s gift, 
xviii. 28, 29. ways of entering into it, 
ib. 30, 31. 

" Life of Lif begotten/ iv. 7.xi. 4, 18. 

Light made by Him who made Dark 
ness, ix. 7. 

The Father is Light eternal, vi. 9. 
light given to souls by the Cross, xiii. 
L by the Holy Ghost, xvi. 3, 11. v. 
Baptism, Enlighten, Illuminate. 

Light of Light begotten, "iv. 7. xi.4, 18. 

" Like in all things to the Father," iv. 7. 
xi. 4,9, 18. v. xi. 19. 

" Like to Himself," vi. 7. 

" Likeness of God," xi?. 10. 

Lion of the tribe of Judah, x. 3. 

Living Spirit, v. Spirit. 

Living Word. v. Word. 

Lord, Christ Lord of all because Maker 
of all, x. 5, 6. xi. 21, &c. not by ad 
vancement, but by nature, x. 5. before 
His Incarnation, x. 6. from eternity, 
x. 9. v. note, by the will of the Father, 
x. 9. illustration of this, xi. 22. Lord 
of Angels, x. 10. 

Lot, xix. 8. 



M. 



Macedonian empire, iv. 34. 



Magic to be shunned by Christians, 
iv. 37. service of the devil, xix. 8. 

Maker of all things, iv. 4. visible and 
invisible, Christ, xi. 21 24. v. Creator. 

Man work of Christ as well as of the 
Father, x. 6. of God s own hands, 
xii. 5, 26. in God s Image, xii. 5. 
retained God s Image but lost His 
Likeness, xiv. 10. his twofold nature, 
iii. 4. iv. 18. world made for him, 
xii. 5. 

First man brought death, xiii. 2. 
his fall, xii. 5. man s miserable con 
dition before the Incarnation, xii. 6, 7. 
forsook God, for the devil, ii. 1. vi. 10. 
vii. 13. 

Christ came to restore him, xii. 5, 
&c. by Christ hallowed, and made 
partaker of God, xii. 15. allowed to 
call God, Father, vii. 7, 12. partaker 
of His name, Intr. 6. and of Christ s, 
x. 16. 

Power of man in faith, v. 1 1 . by 
the HoJy Ghost, xvi. 16. can wrestle 
with the Devil through the Holy 
Ghost, viii. 4. xvi. 19. 

his uants met by Christ s various 
offices, x. 3 5. v. Incarnation. 

his ministry used to convey God s 
gifts, xvii. 35, 36. 

Manassch, saved through repentance, ii. 
14. 

Manes blended all previous heresies, vi. 

20. xvi. 9. History, vi. 24, &c. a 
slave, vi. 24. changed his name, ib. 
did not arise from among Christians, 
vi. 21. connection with the Greek phi 
losophy of Alexandria, vi. 22 24. and 
with Persian, vi. 24. his disputatious 
spirit, vi. 24. claims to be the Para 
clete, vi. 25. xvi. 6, 9. fails to cure 
miraculously the Persian King s son, 
vi. 25. Flies from prison, vi. 26. dis 
putes with Archelaus before heathen 
judges, vi. 27. seized and put to death 
by the Persian King, vi. 30. 

His influence, vi. 25. his disciples, 
vi. 31. 

Manichasan doctrines, vide xi. 4, 
note. Two principles, iv. 4, 5. vi. 12, 
1 3, 27, 28. perversion of Scripture for 
this doctrine, vi. 28. they blaspheme 
the generation of the Son, vii. 5. 
the God of the Old Testament, vi. 27. 
xvi. 4. call the Sun Christ, vi. 13. xi. 

21. abhorrence of the material world, 
iv. 22, 27. vi. 31, 32, 34. deny the 
reality of Christ s Resurrection, xiv. 
21. fatalism, iv. 18 21. baptism and 
offering, vi. 33. forged gospels, iv. 36. 
vi. 31. pollutions and blasphemy, vi. 
3032. 

Manes \\orse than Simon Magus, 
xvi. 10. his followers to be carefully 



INDEX. 



shunned, vi. 36. knoxvledge of their 
doctrines almost pollution, vi. 13, 34. 
carefully enquired into by S. Cyril, 
vi. 34. * 

Marcellits, his heresy about Christ s king 
dom, iv. 15. xv. 27. combated, xv. 
29 32. denied the personality of the 
Word, iv. 8. {note.) a Sabellian, xi. 
17, note. 

Mttrc tOH, his heresy, iv.4. vi. 16. divided 
the Justice and Goodness of God, ib. 
held three Gods, xvi.4, 7.v.xi.4, note, 
removed all texts of the Old Testa 
ment from the New, vi. 16. xvi. 7. 

Marriage though inferior to Virginity yet 
honourable, iv. 25. not to be despised 
by the unmarried, ib. acknowledged 
by the Holy Ghost, xvii. 7. second 
marriage permitted to the weak, iv. 
26. 

Martyrs alone saved without Baptism of 
water, being baptized with blood, iii. 
10. xiii. 21. make confession, iii. 10. 
trained by the Holy Ghost, xvi. 12. 
strengthened by the Comforter, xvi. 
20, 21. only by Him can they suffer, 
ib. under Antichrist, xv. 17. 

Mary the Virgin-Mother of God, x. 19. 
v. xii. 33, 34. how called the wife 
of Joseph, xii. 31. sanctified by the 
Holy Ghost, xii. 29, 32. xvii. 6. 
sprung from David, xii. 24. the 
witness of Christ, x. 19. type of 
Virgins, xii. 33. repaired the loss 
caused by Eve, xii. 29. Christ truly 
born of her, iv. 9. xii. 3. 

Mart/ Magdalene, her visit to the Sepul 
chre foretold, xiv. 12. her noble love, 
xiv. 13. 

Mutth^c wrote in Hebrew, xiv. 15. 

Meats abstained from, not as unclean, 
but for self-denial, iv. 27, 37. vi. 35. 
Jewish distinctions not to be observed, 
iv. 37. offered to idols forbidden, 
iv. 28. vide xvii. 29. 

M - hue. of Christ in judgment foretold, 
xiii. 16. 

Mcnandcr, his heresy, vi. 16. 

Mercy of God to sinners, ii. 5, 6, 10. 
even to Angels, ii. 10. 

^limclcs of Christ as (rod, iv. 9. claimed 
by Antichrist, xv. 14. false ones 
permitted trial of Christian faith, 
stumbling-blocks of the unfaithful, 
xv. 17. 

Mithras, wor.-hipped in Persia, vi. 23. 
his ministers oppose Terebinthus and 
Manes, ib. 24. 

Montanits condemned second marriage, 
iv. 26, note, called himself the Holy 
Ghost, xvi. 8. charged by S. Cyril 
with profligacy, ami with horrid mys- 
lories, ib. 



Moon, her changes an intimation of the 
Resurrection, xviii. 10. 

Moon in the Church, xvi. 22. 

Moses the good schoolmaster, vii. 8. had 
the Holy Ghost, xvi. 27. beheld Christ, 
x. 6, 7. xii. 16. intercession for the 
people and Aaron an encouragement 
to penitents, ii. 10. change of his rod 
as hard as Christ s birth, xii. 28. his 
rod, type of the wood of the Cross, 
xiii. 20. sweetening th&lt;3 water by trees, 
a type of the Passion, ib. river changed 
into blood by him corresponds with 
Christ s water and blood, xiii. 21. 

Mysteries of Christ, i. 1. of Baptism 
and the Eucharist, of the Altar, xviii. 
32, 33. xix. 1. not to be pried 
into, Intr. 2, 4. iii. 7. nor divulged to 
Catechumens or strangers, Inlr. 12. 
vi. 29. glory of the Church, vi. 29. 
our account of them negative not posi 
tive, vi. 2. xi. 11. xvi. 5. not to be 
interpreted by human conceptions, xi. 
7, 8. for praise not curiosity, vi. 5. 
we must not be silent about them, ib. 

44 Mystery of iniquity," xv. 18. 



N. 



Name of God, vi. 9. xxiii. 12. many 
names of Him, vi. 7. of our Lord, x.3. 
name of Jesus, its meaning, x. 4, 11, 
13. of Christ, x. 4, 14. virtue of the 
name of Christ, iv. 13. names of the 
Holy Ghost, xvii. 2, 4, 5. various 
names of God, Christ, and the Holy 
Ghost, not to be profanely distin 
guished into persons, vi. 7. x. 3. xvii. 
2, 3. Christians partakers of God s 
name, Intr. 6. v. 1. of Christ s, x. 16. 
new name of Christians, i. 4. x. 16. 

Typical names given to Joshua and 
Aaron, x. 11. significant names of 
Judas, xiii. 9. Samuel, Intr. 14. 

Name of Manes, vi. 20, 24. of the Gnos 
tics, \vi. 7. 

Napkin with which Christ girded Him 
self symbolical of His human nature, 
xii. 1. 

Nathan, ii. 11. 

Nations all subject to Christ, xvi. 22. 
xvii. 10. 

Nalh-i/ii s, iv. 5. ix. 8. 

Nature not cause of righteousness or sin, 
iv. 18 21. nor of salvation or ruin, 
vii. 13. 

Nature of God, vi. 7. God by 
nature Father of Christ, vii. 4. 

Natural world, its wonders witness for 
God, ix. 2,&c. 

Nt l&gt;iicli&lt;;diit zzar an instance of the effi 
cacy of repentance, ii. 17, 18. 



294 



INDEX. 



Necessity, none with God,iv.5. nor upon 
man, iv. 18 21. not the reason of 
men s salvation or ruin, vii. 13. 

Nigltt, its religious uses, ix, 7. 

Noah, his ark of wood type of the Church, 
xvii. 10. of the wood of the Cross, 
xiii. 20. Example of decent order in 
the Church, Intr. 14. his dove a type 
of the dove of the Holy Ghost, 
xvii 10. 

Himself a type of Christ, as author 
of a new birth, xvii. 10. 

O. 

Obedience of Christ, xiii. 5. as a Son, not 
a servant, to the Father, x. 9. xv. 30. 

Offering of Christ sacrificed for us in the 
Eucharist, xxiii. 10. 

Oil, exorcised of Haptism, xx. 3. sym 
bolical, and powerful to drive away 
devils, ib. 

Old Fathers delivered by Christ from 
H tides, iv. 11. xiv. 19. 

Old Testament, its books, iv. 35. docu 
ment of appeal for Christian truth, 
xiv. 2. (v. Father, Prophet, Scripture, 
Testament,} blasphemed by Heretics, 
iv. 33. impiously separated by them 
from the New, xvi. 4. 

Old man put off by Confession and Bap 
tism, i. 2. xix. 10. xx 2. 

Olives, \\\e spiritual olive-trees, i.4.v.xx. 3. 

Olircs, mount of.xii. 1 1 .witness of the Re 
surrection, xiv. 23. scene of the Ascen 
sion, xiv. 25. why passed by David, 
when flying from Absalom, ii. II. 

One, how Christ is one with the Father, 
xi. 16. 

Only-begotten, meaning of the word, 
x*. 3. xi. 1, 2, &c. 13, 14. 

Order commended by our Lord s ex 
ample, iii. 11, 13, 14. of the Church, 
Intr. 4, 13. vi. 35, 36. 

Orders of the ministry, xvi. 22. xvii. 35. 

P. 

Parable of the marriage garment applied 
to Baptism, Intr. 3. iii. 2. of the wise 
and foolish Virgins, xv. 26. of the La 
bourers, xiii. 31. of the Lost Sheep, 
xv. 24. 

Paradise, Adam in Paradise, xii. 5. his 
fall, ii. 4. v. xiii. 19. placed in Adam s 
view when fallen, ii. 7. Invisible Para- 
diseopenedin Baptism, Intr. 15,16. i. 4. 
xix. 1, 9. by Faith, v. 10. distinguished 
from heaven, xiv. 26. restored by the 
Cross, xiii. 30. The penitent thief the 
first to enter it, ib. 

Parent, v. Father. 

Passion of Christ real, xiii. 4. witnesses 
of it, ib. 38, 39. gainsaid by the Jews, 



xiii. 7. witnessed by the Prophets, 
xiii. 8, 9, &c. even in its details, ib. 
answers circumstantially to the Fall, 
xiii. 18, 19. its place, time, &c. pro 
phesied, xiii. 23, &c. represented in 
Baptism, xx. 5. fellowship with it 
therein, ib. 5, 6, 7. 
Passion, " without passion," aTa.&uf, 

Christ s generation, vi. 6. vii. 5. 
Pustovtr, the eating of the Paschal 
Lamb, a type of Christ s twofold na 
ture, xii. 1. 

Patience, of Christ foretold, xiii. 6, 13. 
gives force to His teaching, ib. His 
Divine glory not the reward of it, iv. 7. 
God s appointed way to glory for 
man, xv. 17. 

Patriarchs, Jewish, of the West, xii. 17. 
S. Paul, ruler and chief of the Church, 
vi. 15. with S. Peter laid Simon 
Magus dead, ib. The former perse 
cutor a witness of Christ, x. 17. why 
his Epistles most numerous, x. 18. 
witness of the Resurrection, xiv. 21. 
descended from the thirdheaventhat he 
might receive martyrdom, xiv. 26. his 
labours in the Holy Ghost, xvii. 26 31. 
completeness and variety of his teach 
ing concerning theHoly Ghost, xvii. 34. 
Paulianista denied the eternity of Christ s 

throne, xiv. 27. 
Pence made by Christ first among His 

foes, xiii. 14. by His death, xiii. 33. 
Penitence of forty days before Baptism, 
Intr. 4. i. 5. gift of God, Intr. 9. 
preparatory to Baptism, ii. passim, 
iii. 2, 7, 8. not declined by David 
after forgiveness, ii. 12. cleansing 
of penitence, i. 5. iii. 2. 
Penitents must not despair, ii. 5. 
Pentecost, xvi. 4, 9. Spirit descended 
not fully till then, xvi. 26. xvii. 
12, 13. His descent then, xvii. 15. 
Perfections of God, vi. 7, 8. of the Fa 
ther and the Son, xi. 18. 
Persecution, xiii. 23. the Baptism of blood 
in it, iii. 10. xiii 21. under Antichrist, 
the fiercest, yet short, XT. 16. 
Persia, con verts there witnesses of Christ, 
x. 19. worship of Mithras, vi. 23. 
origin of Manicheism, vi. 24. wars 
with Rome, xv. 6. 
Person, distinction of, not implied in 

various names, v. Name. 
Personality of the Word, iv. 8. xi. 10. 
of the Holy Ghost, xvi. 3. xvii. 2, 5, 
28, 29. 

S. Peter chief ruler of the Church, ii. 19. 
vi. 15. xi. 3. xvii. 27. Chief of the 
Apostles, ii. 19. xvii. 27. His inspired 
confession of Christ, xi. 3. has the 
keys of Heaven to which Elias but 
went, xiv. 26. xvii. 27. speech at Pen- 



INDEX. 



295 



tecost, xvii. 19. supernatural know 
ledge, xvi. 17. his works in the Holy 
Ghost, xvii. 20, 27. an example of 
the power of repentance, ii. 19. and 
of faith, v. 7. with S. Paul punishes 
Simon Magus, vi. 15. 

Phanwh, I&gt;rael rescued from him, as 
we from Satan, by water, iii. 5. em 
blem of Satan, xix. 2, 3. 

Philip the Deacon, xvi. 14. xvii. 25. 

Plnticas, his zeal, xiii. 2. 

Phcenix, analogy of it, a proof of the 
resurrection, xviii. 8. 

Physician, Christ, Physician of the soul, 

11. 6. x. 4, 13. xii. I. 

Place of Christ s birth foretold, xii. 20. 

of His crucifixion, xiii. 23, 28. of his 

burial, xiii. 35. resurrection, xiv. 

2,511. 

Pomps of the Devil, xix. 6. 
Pontius Pilate, his treatment of Christ, 

xiii. 15, 16. reconciled through Him 

to Herod, xiii. 14. witness of Christ s 

sinlessness, xiii. 3, 38. 
Possession by Devils contrasted with 

Inspiration, xvi. 15. 
Potters field, xiii. 10, 11. 
Poverty of Christians, v. 2. xvi. 19. 

gift of the Holy Ghost, xvi. 22. taught 

by Christ, xiii. 5. 
Power, the Father is Power, vi. 9. Christ, 

God s Power personally subsisting, iv. 

7. of the Godhead one, xvi. 24. 
Prayer, preparatory to Baptism, Intr. 16. 

i. 5. iv. 37. recorded, xv. 23. at 

night, ix. 7. for all men in the 

Communion Service, xxiii. 8. of the 

Saints departed for us, xxiii. 9. for 

the dead, xxiii. 10. Lord s priyer, 

expounded, xxiii. 11, &c. 
Preaching not to be attempted before 

Baptism, iii. 13. 
Preparation necessary for Baptism, Intr. 

1, &c. iii. 7. how to behave during 

it, Intr. 13. for forty days, ib. 4. i. 5. 

complete abstraction from the world, 

Intr. 6, 13, 16. i. 5. 

Fast of the Preparation, xviii. 17. 
Presumption may be indulged under 

seeming reverence, xi. 12. xvi. I. 
Priesthood of Christ eternal, x. 14. xi. 1. 

v. High Priest, Christ Anointing. 
order of, xvii. 35. he who fulfils 

it well abstains from marriage, xii. 

25 
Principles, not two, xi. 14. v. Beginning, 

Father. 

Promise, Spirit of, xiii. 5. 
Prophecy, gift of the Holy Ghost, v. x. 

12. xvi. 12. given in Baptism, xvii. 37. 
every thing concerning Christ the sub 
ject of it, xiii. 8, 9. often enigmatical, 
xiii. 11. 



Gives the signs of His coming, xii. 
1012. (v. Psalms, Scripture, Testa 
ment.) prophecies of the time of His 
coming, xii. 17 19. of Daniel, ib. 
the place, xii. 20. whence, ib. of His 
birth of a Virgin, xii. 21 23. of the 
Virgin s race, xii. 23, 24. of the suf 
ferings of the Christ, xiii. 7 of Judas, 
ib. 9. of the thirty pieces of silver, ib. 

10. and the potters field, ib. 11. of 
Christ s judgment, ib. 12, 14, 16. of 
His mockeiy, ib. 13, 15, 17. of the 
crown of thorns, ib. 17. and wood of 
the Cross, xiii. 19. of the place, xiii. 
23, 28, 32. and time of the Cruci 
fixion, ib. 24. of the darkness, ib. 25. 
of Christ s vesture, ib. 26, 27. of His 
thirst, ib. 29. of the robbers, ib. 30. of 
the tomb, ib. 35. xiv. 3, 11. of the 
Resurrection, xiv. 2, 4, 8, 14, 17, 
20, 21. its lime, ib. 4, 8. and place, 
ib. 5, 6, 9, 11. of the signs following, 
ib. 7. of our Lord s appearance, ib. 

11, 12. of His ascension, ib. 24. 
and sitting at the Father s right 
hand. ib. 28, 29. of the end of the 
world, xv. 3. of Antichrist, ib. 9, 
13. Christ s Prophecy concerning His 
second coming, xv. 3, 4, &c.of Mala- 
chi concerning it, xv. 2. 

Prophets enlightened by the Holy Ghost, 
xvi. 17, 18. Holy Ghost in them, ib. 
3, 28. but partially, xvii. 18. corre 
spond to, but are inferior to the Apo- 
siles, xvi. 4, 24. xiv. 26. witness all 
things concerning Christ, x. 2. xiii. 
8, 9, 13. xiv. 19. nothing to be re 
ceived without their le-timony, xii. 
5, 16. xiii. 8. xiv. 2. our faith rests on 
them, xiv.21. xviii. 14. own the Father 
and the Son, vii. 2. teachers of the 
Faith in the Old Testament, vii. 8, 10. 
xii. 6 9, 29, owned Christ as Lord, 
x. 7, 8. testified of His Godhead, xi. 
15, 16. of the name Jesus, but co 
vertly, x. 12. longed for His coming, 
xii. 7 c. testified of the Holy 
Ghost, xvi. 28, 29. 

are ours as well as the Jews , iii. 6. 
xiv. 16. removed from the Jews to the 
Church, xiii. 29. slighted by the Jews, 
x. 2. 

Providence of God, (aixtveftiet,") instances 
of, Joseph, viii. 4. Peter s confession, 
xi. 3. Christ s prophecy of His coming, 
xv. 4. Thomas, xiii. 39. 

Province, ivu^ to., xvi. 22. 

Psalms, chanted in Divine Service, xiii. 
26. xxiii. 20. at night, ix. 7. Psalms 
prophetical of Christ cannot beapplied 
to David or Solomon, vii. 2. xii. 23. 
v. Prophecy. 

Ptolemy, Philadelphia, iv. 34. 



296 



INDEX. 



Punishment of the wicked, after the Re 
surrection, iv. 31. xviii. 19, 20. 

Q. 

Quick and dead to be judged by Christ, 
xv. 26. 

R. 

Race of Christ according to the flesh, xi. 
5. foretold, xii. 23. 

Rahab, instance of power of repentance, 
ii. 9. type of the freeness of Gospel 
grace, x. 11. 

Raiding, Intr. 11. i. 6. of the Scriptures 
recommended, iv. 37. ix. 7. public, in 
the Church mark of a canonical book, 
iv. 35, 36. 

Rebfijjtizc, Heretics to be rebaptized, 
Intr. 7. 

Red Scd typical of Baptism, iii. 5. xix.2,3. 

Redemption of the world by the cross, 
xiii. 1, 4. wrought not by a mere man, 
but the Son of God, ib, 2, 33. by its 
Creator, vi. 11. 

Regeneration, a.vet yivvtiffif, of souls in the 
Laver of Baptism through Faith, i. 2. 
iii. 4. in the case of Cornelius before 
Baptism, iii. 4. Death and Birth, xx. 4. 
in the Catholic Church, xviii. 26. r- 
A/yym&lt;r/, Baptism so called, Introd. 
16. Laver of, Introd. 11. xviii. 34, 
35. xix. 10. 

Religion consists of true doctrines and 
good works, iv. 2. founded on belief 
in one God, iv. 4, 6. false views of it 
leading to presumption, xi. 12. xvi. 1. 
awe requisite in speaking of its doc 
trines, xvi. 1. its worship indivisible, 
xvi. 4. 

Remission of sins in Baptism, xx. 6. 
freely given to all who believe, i. 5. 
iv.SL xvii. 37. 

Renunciation of Satan and his works in 
Baptism, xix. 2 9. 

Repentance, its efficacy in putting away 
sin, ii. 1. iv. 23. no sin beyond its 
power, ii. 5. instances of, ii. 7, &c. 
its temporal benefits, ii. 13. exemplified 
in Ahab, ib. and Jeroboam, ib. 14. of 
the Laver, iv. 32. Baptism of, xix. 9. 
its fruits, mercy, and almsdeeds, iii. 8. 
Resurrection of Christ, iv. 12. answer to 
objectors from the cases of Eibha, iv. 
12. xiv. 16. Jonah, iv. 12. xiv. 17, 18. 
Elijah, xiv. 16. witnessed by the Old 
Scriptures, xiv. 2, 15, 21. all its cir 
cumstances written in the Psalms and 
Prophets, xiv. 2,&c. (vide Prophecy.) 
not discredited by the soldiers tale, xiv. 
14. Rock of our faith, xiv. 7, 2 1. glori 
fies the Cross, xiii. 4. denied by the 
Munichees, xiv. 21. 



Its former witnesses, iv. 12. (vide 
C/turc7t.)the dead who rose with Him, 
xiv. 16, 18, 20. its present witnesses, 
xiv. 22, &c. 

Baptism a resemblance of it, iii. 12. 
xx. 4. 

Resurrection of the body ; analogies for 
it in nature, iv. 30. xviii. 6. faith in 
it principle of holiness, iv. 30. xii. 34. 
xviii. 1, 20. prominence given to it by 
the Church, ib. and opposition of 
heresy, ib. objections to its possibility, 
xviii. 2. answered by God s power, 
ib. 3. justice, ib. 4. man s instinct, 
ib. 5. analogies of nature, ib. 6, 7. 
the Phoenix, ib. 8. man s origin, ib. 9. 
God s ordering of the heavenly bodies 
an intimation of it, ib. 10. proved 
against Samaritans, ib. 11 13. objec 
tions from the Prophets answered, &c. 
ib. 14, 15. its fitness proved from the 
Old and New Testaments, 1518. 
xviii. 19. 

Revelation, Spirit of, xvii. 5. 

Reverence to parents, vii. 16. to God, 

taught by His works, ix. 16. in the 

Church, Intr. 13, 15. vi. 35. to the 

ancient Bishops, iv. 35. xiv. 21. in 

religious discourse, vi. 3. &c. xvi. 1. 

seeming, may cloke impiety, xi. 12,17. 

Reward given according to men s labours, 

i. 5. iv. 24, 27. 

Riches* not as heretics thought, the 
devil s but God s, viii. 6, 7. evil 
only in their abuse, vii. 7. we may 
even be justified by them, viii. 6. 
belong to the faithful man, v. 2. 
viii. 6. who despises them, v. 2. 
Righteous, " the Righteous, * v. 10. 
Righteousness of Christ greater than our 
sin, xiii. 33. we gain righteousness in 
Baptism, i. 4. Christ God s Righte 
ousness personally subsisting, iv. 7. 
Rock, riven for Christ the Rock, xiii. 34. 
still seen, ib. 39. that followed Israel, 
x. 7. note. 
Rod of Aaron, xii. 28. of Moses, ib. 

vide Mosa* 

Romans, conquest of Judaea by them 
proof of Christ, xii. 17, 18. empire 
succeeded by Antichrist, xv. 11, 12. 
wars with 1 ersia, xv. 6. 



S. 



Sabbaths, Jewish nottobc observed,iv.37. 

Subuoih, a name of God, vi. 7. viii. 8. 

Sabcltiiis,v. iv.xi. 10. confounds the Holy 
Trinity, xvi. 4. confuted by the very 
arrangement of the Creed, xvii. 34. 
his heresy and Arianism alike to be 
avoided, iv. 8. xi. 13, 16, 17, 18. are 
marks of the falling away, xv. 9. 



INDEX. 



297 



Sacrifice of Christ, x. 3, 5. Sacrifice of 
I he Eucharist, xxiii. 8, 9. Christ 
sacrificed offered in the Eucharist, 
xxiii. 10. 

Saints of the Old Testament delivered by 
Christ from Hades, iv. 11. xiv. 19. 
rose with Him, xiv. 16, 18. according 
to Prophecy, xiv. 17. 

Salvation depends on the truth of Christ s 
manhood, iv. 9. xiii. 37. one, xvi. 24. of 
the Laver, iv. 37. xix. 10. given to none 
without Baptism, iii. 10. to be de 
spaired of by none, ii. 5. vide Christ, 
Baptism , Ma ft. 

Samaritans, iv. 37. vi. 33. xviii. 1. 

Samuel, meaning of the name, Intr. 1. 

Sitnctificution of all things by the Holy 
Ghost, iv. 16. xvi. 3. of the Church, 
xri. H, 22. of Angels and Prophets, 
xri. 23. vide Spirit. % 

Sarah, her bearing a son as hard as the 
Virgin s, xii. 28. 

Sarmatians, xvi. 22. 

Satan, meaning of the word, ii. 4. 

Scripture, its canon to be received from 
the Church, iv. 33. as read in the 
Church, iv. 35. xv. 13. and settled and 
handed down by Apostles and ancient 
Bishops, iv. 35. consistsof Old and New 
Testaments, iv. 33. (vide Testament.) 
number and names of its books, ib.35, 
36. history of the Septuagint version, 
iv. 34. mutilated by Marcion, xvi. 7. 
adulterated with forgeries by the Ma- 
nichees, iv. 36. vi. 31. spoken by the 
Holy Ghost, xi. 12. xvi. 1, 2. 

Nothing to be received as of theFaith 
unless proved by it, iv. 17. its teaching 
embodied in the Creed, iv. 33. v. 12. 
faith grounded on it, xii. 16, 17. xiii. 8, 
9. xiv. 2. reveal all we know, or may 
speak of the generation of the Son, xi. 
12. of the nature of the Holy Ghost.xvi. 
1, 2, 24. we may not speak beyond 
them, xii. 3. variously interpreted, e.g. 
iii. 16. vi. 28, 29. x. 15. xii. 19. xvii. 
9 11. perverted by heretics, e. g. iv. 
19. vi. 17, 27, 28, 29. vii. 9, 13. xv.3. 
danger of alleging it wrongly should 
teach us reverence and fear, xvi. 1. 
we know not all Us meaning, ib. xi.12. 
Its abundance, xv. 15. xvi. 32. xvii. 
1, 20, 34, &c. witnesses every thing 
concerning Christ, xiii. 8, 13. 

To be diligently searched, iv. 37. ix. 
7. xiii. 8. 

Scythianus the Saracen, forerunner of 
Manes, vi. 22. 

Sea, witness uf God s glory, ix. 11. of 
Christ s coining, x.19. passion, xiii. 39. 
resurrection, xiv. 17 20, 23. 

Scat, the Faith so called, iv. 17. 

Baptism, seal indissoluble, Intr. 16. 



marks us for Christ s, i. 2. through 
water, iii. 4. Seal of Salvation, i. 3. 

Of the Holy Ghost given in Baptism, 
iii. 3, 4, 12. iv. 16. v. 6. xvi. 24. 
xvii. 35, 36. xxii. 7. 
Of Circumcision, v. 5. 
Of the Cross, xiii. 36. 

Seasons, their order glorifies God, ix. 6. 
of the Resurrection, that of Creation, 
xiv. 10. foretold, xiv. 2, 10. 

Semiaiians, v. note to iv. 7. Pref. p. ii, 
iv, ix. 

Septuagint version, its history, iv. 34. 
held inspired, ib. note. 

Sepulchre of Christ prophesied of, xiii.35. 
xiv. 9. his witness, x. 19. account of, 
xiv. 9. 

Serpent, the devil, watches candidates 
for Baptism, Intr. 16. apostate Ser 
pent, iv. 37. brazen, a type of the 
Crucifixion, xiii. 20. 

Session of Christ at God s right hand, 
xiv. 27. proved from Scripture, ib. 28. 
eternal, iv. 7. xiv. 27, 30. 

Sliccp, x. 3, 5. 

Shcw-brcad,s. type of the Eucharist, xxii. 5. 

Sick even yet healed by Christ, x. 13. 
must not have recourse to amulets or 
sorcery, iv. 37. xix. 8. 

Side of Christ typically pierced, xiii. 21. 
in respect of Baptism, iii. 10. 

Signs of Christ given by the Prophets, 
xiii. 10. (\ideProphecy.) given to Ahaz 
explained, xii. 22. signs of Moses 
correspond to Christ s acts, xiii. 20, 
21. of the Son of Man, the Cross, xiii. 
41. of the Second Advent given by 
Christ Himself, xv. 4, &c. lying signs 
of Antichrist, xv. 11 15. a trial of 
faith, xv. 17. of the Cross, (vide Cross.) 
God s free but great gift, xiii. 36. 

Simon Magus, was baptized but not en 
lightened, Intr. 2. xvii. 35. Father of all 
heresy, vi. 14. His blasphemies against 
the Father and Holy Ghost, ib. xvi. 6. 
His fate, vi. 15. compared with Mane, 
xvi. 10. 

Sin, ailment of the soul, ii. 1. man s 
choice, not God s work, ii. 1. not of 
necessity, iv. 18 21. not a thing ex 
ternal but from within, and our own 
nature, ii. 2. prompted not forced by 
the Devil who is its chief author, ii. 
3, 4. iv. 21. death by sin, xiii. 2. 
makes us enemies to God, and slays 
us, xiii. 33. leagues us with Satan, 
xix. 9. marred God s world, xii. 5. and 
ruined man, xii. 6, &c. all men bound 
by it, xiii. 1,2. dead in it, iii. 12. 
Christ came to destroy it, xii. 8. died 
for our sins and purged them, ii. JO. 
iii. 12. xiii. 1,2, 4, 6, 23, 33. being 
Himself sinless, ii. 10. iii. 12. xiii. 3, 



298 



INDEX. 



5, 23. sin came by one man, died with 
one man, xiii. 2, 28. iii. 19,. 

Fearful yet not incurable to the 
penitent, ii. 1 5. readiness of God to 
forgive the believing, ii. 6. efficacy of 
repentance, ii. 7, Sec. Instances, ib. 
collective sin pardoned, ii. 10. obsti 
nate sin alone not pardoned, iii. 8. 

Completely and freely remitted to 
all in Baptism by faith, Intr. 8. i. 5. 
iii. 11, 12, 15. iv. 32. xvii. 37. xviii. 
20. xx. 6. Baptism its remedy, iv.32. 
remitted even in John s Baptism, iii. 
7. Baptism a death to sin, Intr. 5. sin 
cleansed by Exorcisms, Intr. 9. and 
the exorcised oil, xx. 3. by the power 
of the Holy Ghost, xvii. 15. 

Overcome by Faith, v. 4. steals 
on us, ii. 3. after Baptism recorded 
against the Judgment, XT. 23. Its 
scars remain, xviii. 20. 

Sin against the Holy Ghost, xvi. 1. 

Sion, its desolation revealed by the Spirit 
to Isaiah, xvi. 18. 

Sodom, Christ wrought with the Father 
in its destruction, x. 6. 

Soldiers, their tale about the sepulchre 
presignified by Isaiah and Jonah, xiv. 

14, 20. Its vanity, xiv. 14. 
Solitaries, order of, iv. 24. xii. 33. xvi. 

22. Christ their example, xii. 33. 

Solomon, instance of the efficacy of re 
pentance, ii. 13. 

Son, Christ the Son of God, with the 
Father and the Holy Ghost, Introd. 

15. vide Trinity . 

Implied in the mention of the Father, 
vii. 4. glorified and worshipped with 
Him, and the Holy Ghost, vi. 1. x. 2. 
with the Holy Ghost partaker of His 
Godhead, vi. 6. vide Christ. 

In a singular sense, only begotten, 
vii. 5, 10. x. 3. xi. 2, 4. so called by 
the Father, xi. 2. by nature, not 
adoption, vii. 10. x. 4. or advance 
ment, xi. 4, 7, 13, 15, &c. not after 
the manner of human generation, xi. 
4, 8. nor as Christians are God s Sons, 
iii. 14. vii. 7. xi. 9, 19. nor as mind 
begets thought, xi. 10. begotten not 
made, xi. 4, 14. xv. 9. God, xi. 13. 
incomprehensibly, iv. 7. xi. 4, 5, 11. 
as God only knoweth, xi. 11, 12, 13. 
from eternity, iv. 7. vii. 5. xi. 4, 8, 13, 
14, 17, 19,20. apart from time, xi. 5, 
7, 14. spiritually, xi. 5, 7. unoriginate, 
xi. 4, 7, 13. the Son never was not, 
xi. 8, 14, 17. 

Like in all things to the Father, iv. 
7. xi. 4, 9, 18, 19. of the Father as 
His beginning, xi. 14, 20. xiii. 23. 
wanting nothing to the glory of the 
Godhead, iv. 7. xi. 13. was with the 



Father, x. 68. One with the Father, 
xi. 16. neither to be separated from 
nor confounded with the Father, iv. 
7. xi. 16, 17, 18, 20. did not be 
come the Father, xi. 13. abides for 
ever, not absorbed into the Father, xv. 
27 ,30. how subject to the Father, x. 
9 xv. 30. not numbered among the 
servants of the Father, viii. 5. glori 
fied with the Father, vi. 1. The 
Father s Word, and Wisdom, and 
Power, iv. 7, 8. Maker of all things 
at the Father s will. xi. 22. Lord 
over them, ib. &c. alone, with the 
Holy Ghost, knows and sees the Fat her, 
vi. 6. vii. 11. xi. 12, 13. 

Makes known the Father, vii. 11. 
only way to the Father, vii. 2. x. 1, 3. 
Incarnate to restore the Father s wor- 

* ship, vi. 11. xii. 15. and save the 
world, xii. 4, 5, &c. Father seen only 
in Him, x. 6, 7. xi. 15. Son before 
born in Bethlehem, xi. 20. became 
Son of Man, x. 4. Son of David, 
xi. 5. xii. 23 

Sons of God, Christians, by adoption, 
hi. 14. vii. 7. x\. 9, 19. by Water and 
the Spirit, ib. not of necessity, but 
of one faith, vii. 13. works meet for 
them, vii. 14. 

Soul, free, ii. 1. iv. 18. God s fairest 
work, immortal by God s will, made 
in His image, ib. diseased and de 
stroyed by its own sin, ii. 1. originally 
sinless, wilfully sinned, iv. 19. did not 
sin in another state, ib. purified by 
penitence, aim?, reading of Scripture, 
iv. 37. cleansed by exorcism, Introd. 9. 
sealed, iii. 3, 4. baptized, xvii. 14. 
and brightened by the Holy Ghost, 
xvii. 16. its illumination by faith, v. 
1 1. possession by devils, xvi. 15. con 
trasted with the influence of the Holy 
Ghost, xvi. 16. 

Soul of the world, viii. 2. 

Spaniards in the Church, xvi. 22. 

Spectacles of the heathen to be shunned, 
iv. 37. 

Speculation taking the place of soberness 
in S. Cyril s time, xv. 9. not to in 
trude beyond what is written, xi. 12. 
xvi. 1, 2. 

Spirit, the word variously used, xvi. 13, 
15. yet with a distinguishing term, 
xv. 15. 

Holy Spirit various names, xvii. 2, 
3, 4. yet one only, iv. 16. xvi. 12. 
xvii. 2,3. included in the Holy Trinity, 
xvi. 4. vide iv. 16. vi. 1, 6. xvi. 19. in 
the form of Baptism, xix. 9. xx. 4,3. 
A living Person, iv. 16. xvi. 3, 1, 
14. xvii. 2, 5, 28, 29, 33. incompre 
hensible, xvi. 1, 2. alone with the Son, 



INDEX. 



299 



beholds, and reveals the Father, vi. 6. 
vii. 11. xi. 12. not numbered among 
the Father s servants, viii. 5. partaker 
of the Father s Godhead, vi. 6. far 
above all creatures, xvi. 23. shares 
the Father s glory, vi. 1. anil Christ s, 
xvi. 4. sanctifies and deifies all intelli 
gent beings, iv. 16. xvi. 3. the Church, 
xvi. 14, 22. xvii. 14. Angels, xvi. 23. 
xvii. 2. Prophets, xvi. 23. 

Indivisible yet manifold in working, 
iv. 16. xvi. 12. xvii. 2, 12. 

He was in the Law and the Prophets, 
iv. 16. dictated the Scriptures, iv. 16, 
33. xi. 12. xvi. 1, 2, 3, 4, 24. same 
Spirit witnessed of Christ in the Old 
Testament, manifested Him in the 
New, xvi. 3, 16, 24. spake by the 
Prophets, iv. 16. was in the Old Tes 
tament Saints, xvi. 26 28. on the 
seventy Elders, xvi. 25, 26. illu 
minated the Prophets, xvi. 17, 18. 
witnessed of by them, xvi. 28, 29. 
given partially before Pentecost, xvi. 
26. xvii. 12, 13, 18. 

Descended visibly on our Lord, iii. 

14. why, xvii. 9. xxi. 1. The Com 
forter, xvi. 20. xvii. 4. given partially 
to the Apostles before the Ascension, 
xvii. 12. fully at Pentecost, xvi. 26. 
xvii. 12. His Baptism, xvii. 14, 15. 
given to us in Baptism, iii. 5, 8, 14, 
16. (vide note.) iv. 16. xx. 6. propor- 
tionably to each man s faith, i. 5. iii. 

1, 2. more than the remission of sins, 
iii. 7, 15. xxii 37. illuminates, Introd. 

2. seals the souls in Baptism, iii. 4. iv. 
16. xvii. 35, 36. perfects Kaptism, yet 
requires water, iii. 4, 16. not given to 
hypocrites, Introd. 2, 4. iii. 1. xvii. 35. 
conveyed symbolically in the Chrism 
after the Washing, xxi. 15. oblite 
rates sin and brightens the soul, xvii. 

15. trains and comforts the Martyrs, 
xvi. 12, 20, 21. gives all graces, xvi. 
12. His inspiration, xvi. 16. and illu 
mination, ib. gives power over the 
flesh, world, and the Devil, xvi. 19. 
gives grace to all who believe, xvi. 22. 
sanctifies and changes the Bread and 
Wine, xxiii. 7, 19. 

Teaching concerning Him in the 
New Testament, xvii. 1. of our Lord, 
xvii. 11. in the Epistles of St. Paul, 
xvii. 33. 

His teaching one with Christ s, xvi. 
14. His operations by the will of the 
Father recorded in the Acts, xvii. 21, 
31. with the Father and the Son has 
established the New Covenant in the 
Church, xvii. 29. 

Danger of speaking amiss concern 
ing Him, xvi. 1, 2, 6. blasphemies 



against Him of the Gnostics, xvi. 6, 7. 

Manes, vi. 25. xvi. 6, 9. Marcion, xvi. 

9. Montanus, xvi. 8. Sabellius, xvi. 

4. xvii. 34. Simon Magus, vi. 14. 

Valcntinus, xvi. 6. 
Start rhave no influence, iv. 18. not to be 

heeded by Christians, iv. 37. ix. 8. 

glorify God, ix. 5, 6. their uses to 

man, ix. 8. shall perchance have a 

resurrection, xv. 3. 
Stephen, xvii. 3, 4. 

Stone of the Sepulchre, xiii. 39. xiv. 22. 
" Stone cut out without hands," xii. 18. 

xv. 28. 

Strangled things forbidden, iv. 28. 
Subjection of the Son to the Father, 

x. 9. xv. 30. 
Susannah, xvi. 31. 



T. 



Table, spiritual Table of the Lord, xxii. 7. 
vide i. 6. 

Taverns to be shunned by Christians, 
iv. 37. 

Temple of Jerusalem, vii. 6. to be rebuilt 
by Antichrist, xv. 15. failure of Julian s 
attempt to rebuild it, declared by S. 
Cyril, Preface p. v. 

Temptation, reason of our Lord s, iii. 13. 
xxi. 4. meaning of " Lead us not into 
temptation," xxiii. 17. 

Terebinihus, successor of Scythianus and 
forerunner of Manes, vi. 23. 

Testaments, the two Testaments made up 
the Scripture, iv. 33. impiously sepa 
rated by Heretics, vii. 5. xvi. 4. Christ 
the object of Prophecy in the Old, of 
History in the New, xvi. 3. same 
Spirit in both, (vide Spirit,} iv. 16. 
xvi. 4, 6. xvii. 5. both announce the 
gift of Baptism, iii. 16. harmony of 
their doctrine, ii. 4. 

Old Testament necessary as a wit 
ness to Christ, xvi. 7. God of it the 
Father of Christ, vii. 5. ( vide Prophecy.) 
Christ, xvi. 11. and His Apostles 
refer us to it, xiv. 2. blasphemed by 
Heretics, iv. 33. e. g. Manes, vi. 27. 
texts of it erased by Marcion from the 
New, vi. 16. xvi. 7. its witness to the 
Spirit, xvi. 28 32. to the Resurrection 
of the Body, xviii. 10, &c. History of 
its translation into Greek, iv. 34. 

Old Testament or Covenant ended, 
New began in the Baptism of John, 
iii. 6. Old abolished, New established 
in the Catholic Church by the Holy 
Trinity, xvii. 29. 

Thief on the cross first-fruits of Christ s 
death, and first to enter Paradise, xiii. 
30, 31. saved by faith, without works^ 



300 



INDEX. 



ib. v. 10. witness of Christ s sinless- 
ness, xiii. 3. 

TJiirty pieces of silver, prophecy of them, 
xiii. 10. thirty ^Eons of Valentinus, 
his argument for the number, vi. 17. 

Thomas doubted for our sakes through 
God s providence, xiii. 39. 

Thomas the disciple of Manes his forged 
Gospel, iv. 36. vi. 31. 

Thorns, crown of, cancelled Adam s 
curse of thorns, xiii. 17, 18. 

Throne of Christ eternal, not by advance 
ment, iv. 7. xi. 17. He had it before 
His suffering, ib. at the Father s right 
hand, xiv. 27,30. not to be curiously 
disputed of, ib. has no end, xv. 27. 
David, xii. 23. 

Till, vide Until. 

Time has no place as regards God and 
Christ, iv. 4, 7, &c. of Christ s com 
ing, &c. prophesied of, (vide Pro 
phecy ;) of Christ s second coming 
unknown, and not to be curiously 
examined into, xv. 4. 

" Time" means a year in the 
Prophets, xv. 16. 

To-day" meaning of, in Ps. 1 10, xi. 5. 
timeless and eternal, ib. in the Lord s 
prayer, xxiii. 15. 

Tongues i fiery tongues, xvii. 15. gift of 
Pentecost, xvii. 16. Instead of the 
confusion of Babel, xvii. 17. A Sign 
foretold of Christ s Resurrection, xiv. 
7. 

Tradition of the Creed, v. 12, 13. 

Tradition of interpretations, xiii. 21. 
xv. 13. 

Transfiguration of the Lord, xii. 6. a 
glimpse of His awful glory, x. 7. 

Tree of the Cross corresponds to the 
Tree of knowledge, xiii. 19. planted 
in the earth, to bless it, and release 
the dead, xiii. 26. 

Trinity, iv. 16. xvii. 34. doctrine of, 
acknowledged in Baptism, xvi. 4, It). 
\\. 4. profession of Faith in, xix. 9. 
not to be revealed to Catechumens or 
Gentiles, vi. 29. Heretics divide or 
confuse it, xvi. 4. (vide Arius, Sabd- 
lius.) not Tritheism, ib. not a matter 
for curious speculation, xvi. 24. 

Holy Trinity present in Baptism, 
Introd. 15. have established the New 
Covenant in the Church, xvii. 29. 
Adoption given us by the Father s 
grace, through the Son and Holy 
Ghost, vii. 7. the Son with the 
Holy Ghost, sees the Father, vi. 6. 
vii. 11. with and through the Holy 
Ghost reveals Him, vi. 6. all things 
serve the Father save the Son and 
Spirit, viii. 5. the Father through the 
Son, with the Holy Ghost, bestows all 



thing*, xvi. 24. the saving Dispensa 
tion to usward from the Father, Son, 
and Holy Ghost, xvii. 5. Father spake 
by the Holy Ghost, xvii. 38. the Father 
through the Son in the Holy Ghost 
gives all things, xviii. 29. Glory to 
be ascribed indivisibly to Father and 
Son with the Holy Ghost, vi. 1. "in the 
power of the Holy Ghost, by the will 
of Father and Son,"xvii. 21. v. xvii.31. 

Tritheism, xvi. 4. r. xi. 4. note. 

Truth counterfeited by Satan, that it may 
be disbelieved, xv. 1 1 . grace necessary 
lest it be received falsely, xvi. 2. 
Hatred of it cause of error, xv. 17. 

Types, their wonderful truth, xiii. 19. 
instances, ib. 17 23. different per 
sons, types of different offices in the 
One Antitype; e.g. Joshua and Aaron 
of Jesus Christ, x. 11. Joshua how a 
type, ib. type of Moses rod (vide 
Moses)\ of Aaron, xii. 28. types of 
Baptism, iii. 5. xix. 2, 3. 
Jonah, xiv. 17 20. 
John the Baptist a type of the 
ascetic life, iii. 6. the dove, xvii. 9, 10. 
Typical exposition of Eccles. 12, 
1_G. xv. 20. 



U. 



Unalterable, iv. 4. 

Unbcgotten,*u\&lt;\ of God, iv. 4. vi. 7.xi. 13. 

Unbelief, mars the power of Baptism, 

Introd. 2. vide Faith, only reason why 

men are not enlightened by the Holy 

Ghost, xvi. 22. 
Unchangeable, iv. 4. 
Unity of God. vide God. 
Unlearned, the Creed a help to them, 

v. 12. 
Unoriginal^ said of the Father, iv. 4. 

xi. 20. a.vu%ts . of the Son, xi. 4, 

(v. note,) 5, 13. 
" Untir " Unto," does not limit, xv. 29, 

31, 32. vide Hooker, E. P. V. 45. . 2. 
Usury forbidden, iv. 37. 



V. 



Valentinus, vi. 17 19. argues from the 
number of our Saviour s years that 
there are thirty ^Eons, ib. his blas 
phemies against the Holy Ghost, xvi. 6. 

Veil of Christ s flesh, xiii. 32. 

Veilingof the face in Exorcisms. Introd. 
9. 

Very God" Christ begotten, x. 6. xi. 
9, 14, 21. 

Vesture of Christ parted, a sign foretold, 
xiii. 26. 

Vine of Jiulah, xiii. 29. Christ the true 
Vine, x. 5. xiv. 11. xvii. 19. with which 



INDEX. 



301 



we have communion in Baptism, i. 4. 
the Holy Spirit so called, xvii. 18. 

// , meaning of the word in Is. 7, 14. 
gainsaid by the Jews, xii. 21. pro 
phecy that Christ should be born of one, 
xii. 2. objections, xii. 4. not harder 
than things believed by Jews and 
Pagans, xii. 27 30. God born of a 
Virgin, xii. 1. x. 19. to do honour to 
purity, xii. 25. to repair the loss of 
the virgin Eve, xii. 15, 29. vide Ma&gt; // 
the Virgin. 

Christ makes souls virgins, xii. 31. 
Order of Virgins, iv. 24. xii. 33. xvi.28. 
have their part with Mary,xii.34. must 
not despise married persons, iv. 25. 
Parable of the ten virgins, xv. 26. 
Virginity, its excellence, and glory, xii. 
33. xv. 23. an angel life of earth, 
iv. 24. vi. 35. xii. 34. gift of the Holy 
Ghost, xvt. 19. 

W. 

Witrs, signs of Christ s coming, xv. 6. 
irnshhiL of hands before the Commu- 

t 

nion, xxiii. 1 . 

Watchfulness against first approaches of 
sin, ii. 3. against deceivers and Anti 
christ, xv. 4, 18. for Christ s coming, 
xv. 4. 

Watching, preparatory to Baptism, xviii. 
17. 

Water, one in nature and manifold in 
operation, shews forth God s glory, 
ix. 9, 10. and is a fit emblem of the 
Holy Ghost, xvi. 11, 12. principle of 
plants, things flying and creeping, ix. 
10. heavens are of water, iii. 5. ix. 5. 
why chosen as the instrument of Bap 
tism, iii. 5. its uses in the Old cove 
nant, ib. means of rescue to Israel, 
ib. xix. 3. sanctified by Christ s Bap 
tism and miracles, iii. 1 1. xii. 15. 

Waters of Baptism gain a sanctify 
ing power by the invocation of the 
Holy Ghost, iii. 3. though despised 
by the world, Intr. 16. Water and the 
Spirit answer to Man s double nature, 
iii. 4. vide iii. 16. inseparable, iii. 4. 
Waters of Baptism have Christ in 
them, X(Hrro&lt;pi&gt;*, Intr. 15. " the 
grave and themother"of the Baptized, 
xx. 4. 

Water and blood from Christ s side, 
its symbolical meaning, xii. 21. 
Waters of Life, xvi. 11. 

Way, Christ the Way, x. 3. 



West, the region of darkness, xix. 4. 
symbolical meaning effacing it, when 
renouncing Satan, ib. 

White raiment, v. xxii. 8. 

Widowhood, iv. 26. x. 19. xv. 23. 

Wife, meaning of the word in Matt. 1 , 
24. xii. 31. 

Will (tiiXnftet, vtvp.et,) of God the Father, 
Christ made all things by it, x. 5, 9, 
&.c. (v. Son.} v. xvii. 21, 31. 

Wine, new, the grace of the Holy 
Ghost, xvii. 18. water turned into it, 
compared with the Eucharist, xxii. 2. 
Spiritual Wine, xxii. 8. becomes 
Christ s blood, xxii. 1 6. xxiii. 7. 

Wisdom, Christ God s Wisdom person 
ally subsisting, iv. 7. 

Witchcraft, forbidden, iv. 37. 

Witnesses to Christ, x. 17 20. of the 
Crucifixion, xiii. 38. of the Resurrec 
tion, xiv. 22. to be sought for in the 
Prophets, xiii. 8. xvi. 7. 

Woman,]\fe, as death, through a woman, 
xii. 15, 20. piercing of Christ s side 
has reference to woman, xiii. 21. con 
duct of the women who sought Christ, 
xiv. 12 14. 

Works, good works and true doctrines 
make up religion, iv. 2. without Bap 
tism of no avail, iii. 4. after Baptism, 
our works recorded against the Judg 
ment, xv. 23. xviii. 20. vid. xix. 5. 
good works must follow Baptism, xvii. 
37, 38. vii. 14. a preparation for Judg 
ment, xv. 25, 26. 
Of Satan, xix. 5. 

Word, Christ the Personal Word of God, 
iv. 8. xi. 10. Himself God, xi. 3, 16. 
in all reasonable creatures, iv. 8. not 
like human words conceived in the 
mind or spoken, iv. 8. xi. 10. 

World, the work of God, iv. 4. made by 
the evil God according to the Mani- 
chees, vi. 13. made hy the Son, xi. 
21,22. for man, xii. 5. mirrors forth 
God s glory, ix. 2, c. its lessons, ix. 
16. marred by man s sin, xv. 3. shall 
perhaps be renewed at the last day, ib. 
" God of this world," vi. 28, 29. 
Soul of the world, viii. 2. 



X. 



Xtiiithicus, the month, season of the 
Creation, Passover, Resurrection, xiv. 
10. 



INDEX OF GREEK WORDS. 



A^Uffuftiros , iii. 7. 

Alffttirof, x. 13. xiii. 33. xv. 11. xix. 2. 

xxii. 9. 

AxTv}/jt,o&lt;rvv t xiii. 5. xvi. 22. 
, XVI. 7. 

f, Introd. 16. vii. 9. 
op .vof, iv. 33. vide xiii. 7, 19. 
, , X. 10. 

xxii. 3. xxiii. 15. 
Ava.Xviffda.1, XV. 27, 30. 
"Anuses , iv. 4. xi. 4, note. v. xi. 20. vi. 13. 
A*c{tuoy, iv. 7, note. 
Aur/ymJJo a/, vii. 16. 
AT/rvr, XX. 1. xxi. 1. xxiii. 20. 
f , iv. 8. xiii. 37. XV. 21. 
ysttvhtf , vi. 6. 
, XI. 18. 

. iv. 33, 35. xv. 16. 
A-rcffivffets, vii. 5. 
A-jrefretftx, xv. 9. 
A&lt;rff-f T xii/s&lt;v, X. 9. 
fl, Xt. 14, 20. 

w, xii. 16. 

"A&lt;rxn&lt;nj, i. 5. iv. 27. xxiij,. 19. 
Avrt%oufflo{, ii. 1. iv. 18. vii. 13. 

X. 9. 

s, xv. 14, 17. 
, xi. 14. 
A%uMt vtaret, vi. 31. 



E&lt;ra;x/a, xvi. 22. 
ExlxXrmf, iii. 3, 12. xix. 7. 
E&lt;r/i/&lt;r/0f, xxiii. 15. 

vfin. Introd. 4. vi. 35. 
/Tj0v,-, xxi. 1. xxiii. 19. 

/a, iv. 4, 7. xiii. 21, 35. 
uXoyia, xiii. 6. 
vrtiMs, x. 9. xv. 30. 
liffifitiK, xvi. 4. 



, for ^, xii. 20. 
r H OTI aw , xi. 18. 



Titiffctt, r^ ray &lt;yivtfften , X. 12. 
rwt^i/f a-retSus, vi. 6. 
Tmreci, xix. 7. 

ov, V. 10. 
xtfif, iv. 9. vi. 14. xiii. 4, 37. 

fax-tfrrtif, vi. 36. 
iii, xvi. 20. 



/a, x. 19. XV. 23. 

i*, xviii. 24, 25. 

ei, XV. 7, 13. xvii. 10. 
, xiv. 30. 
tiat, ix. 9. 

vftetrof, xxi- 3. 
*E*&lt;rugxo{ yiwitrif, xii. 32. 
^Effl-agxflf -rtt^auffiot, iii. 11. xii. 15. xiv. 

27, 30. 

Ewx-afrotrtt , xi. 10. xvii. 5, 34. 
*E wx oWwv, xv. 9. 
E^iry^enj 6iunrtxri, xiii. 9. 

*E|)T&gt;IT5f , XVI. 6. 

Ega/AaXoytjrjf, ii. 15, note, xviii. 14. 
"Egowf/a, xi. 22. vide x. 5. note. 



iftti, XIX. 6. 
t/xa/f , XI. 5. 
, X. 5. 
/ a, xxiii. 6. 
0to*/f, iv. 16. 
Gioroxo;, X. 19. 
Gifl-w, xi. 7. 

^ier, vi. 33. xviii. 32. xxiii. 2. 



, x. 4. 

, vi. 33. 
i^ivf . x. 13. 



/, Introd. 4. 
io(, xi. 3. 



, xix. 7. xxi. 3. 

cf , iv. 8. x. 3. xvii. 2. 



Mctgrvgtov, xiv. 6. 
MXj. ix. 15. xii. 26. 

MF, vi. 36. vii. I. xvii. 2. 

vs, xii. 10. 

r, vi. 7. xvi. 12. 



, x. 5. xi. 10, 11, 22, 23, 24. xv. 
25. xvi. 12, 31. xvii. 31. 
Ji^flsra, vi. 29. 
NJTOS, i. 4. xiii. 34. xiv. 17, 23. xvii. 
15, 18, 19, 21. xxii. 7. 

ixove/ttet, viii. 4. x. 18. xiii. 39. xiv. 17, 
24. xv. 1, 4. xvii. 5. 
oi, xvii. 29. 
ijf. iv. 9. xii. 15. 
iavre?, xi. 9. vide vi. 7. 
XKTK &lt;rra, iv. 7. it vant, xi. 4, 
9, 18. 

Qp,oouffto9, v. Pref. p. ii. iv. vii. 6. 
irnfis, xxi. 1. 



INDEX. 



303 



dtii vii. 5. 
rJif, vi. 12. viii. 8. xii. 2. xiii. 11. 

xix. 10. 
cir/uo, X. 5. 

n, v. 13. xii. 16. 
oios run -^v^uv, xi. 31. 
ivo;, xii. 21 . 

/a, xiv. 21. xvi. 22. 
Tlaocav, xiv. 2. xv. 27. 



;, vii. 5. 
7, iv. 8. xvi. 4. 
uvu&f, i. 6. x. 14. xiv. 26. 

avta A.mrraf , Introd. 1 7. 
. 2. 3. iii. 3, 4. 

&lt;w, Introd. 13. i. 5. 
, Introd. 15. xi- i. 13. 



, xv. 30. 
is. Introd. 6. vi. 1. 

ot, xvii. 21, 22. xxii. 8. 
c^of, xvi. 28. 
iigfl mitntn, xi. 13. 
Tlgoaigtrif, Introd. 1. vii. 16. ix. 13. xiii. 

6. 29. xv. 30. xvii. 10. xix. 8. 
U^tff^iee., Introd. 4. xviii. 14. 
Tloaziiftna., xxiii. 7. 

UatKo-rrt. x. 5. xi. 1, 3, 7, 13, 15, 17. 
xiv. -27. 

e,-, xii. 3. 
. xii. 14. xx. 6. 
irvs, iv. 35. vi. 15. 
. x. 7. 

os, iv. 8. xi. 10. 
irng, ii. 19. xi. 3. xvii. 27. 
T\urrox.at, xi. 4. 

vxut, xiv. 21. 



uwtu, Iv, xxii. 3. 

Tio0s&lt;rixs ir^oKoicri, xi. 3. 

pet, iv. 8. xi. 16. XV. 9. 
vtiv, XV. 30. 
Jiffif, xviii. 17. 

, vi. 7. vii. 5. ix. 9, 11. x. 3. 
xvi. 5, 24. xvii. 17. 
us, xvii. 2, 5, 28. 



&lt;&o,ivofAtvai, x. 13. 
&lt;t&gt;avTa&lt;r/a, xii. 3. xiii. 37. 
&lt;t&gt;/Xflo-To^y/, XV. 30. 
&lt;&virix.us , X. 9. 

i, Introd. 1, 2. 
t, xiii. 21. 



, xxi. 3. 

X^yrai, xi. 1. xvi. 13. 

jges, Introd. 15. xxii. 3. 



/a, Xlii. 4. 
^i^f, V. 10. 



, iv. 36. 

flf v0u&lt;ro { , xii. 1. xiii. 2, 24, 33. 
xxi. 3. xxii. 6. 



INDEX OF TEXTS. 





GENESIS. 




LEVITICUS. 


1,2. 


iii. 5. 


4,5. 


x. 11. xvi. 13. 


6. 


ix. 5. 


8,3. 


xviii. 24. 


14. 


ix. 8. 






24.25. 


ix. 13. 






26. 


x. 6. xii. 5. xiv. 10. 




NUMBERS. 


27. 


x. 6. 






31. 


xii. 5. 


1 1 , 2429. 


xvi. 25, 26. 


2,7. 


xii. 30. xiii. 2. xvii. 12. 


13, 17. 


x. 11. 




xviii. 13. 


20, 17. 


vid. xi. 17. xvi. 5 


8. 


xix. 9. 


24,9. 


xiv. 3. 


17. 


xiii. 31. 






22. 


xii. 29. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


25. 


xx. 2. 






3. 7, 8. 


xxi. 4. 


4, 10. 


xviii. 24. 


15. 


xvi. 10. 


15. 


vi. 7. 


17. 18. 


xiii. 18. xiv. 11. 


24. 


vi. 27. 


23. 


xix. 9. 


5,26. 


xii. 13. 


24. 


ii. 7. 


9, 10. 


xviii. 24. 


4,1. 


xii. 5. 


20. 


ii. 10. 


8, 8. 10. 


xiii. 10. 


14. 1. 


xi. 4. 


11, 30. 


xii. 28. 


18, 15. 


xii. 17. 


18, 3. 8. 


xii. 16. 


22, 27. 


xii. 21. 


25. 


xviii. 11, 13. 


28, 66. 


xiii. 19. 


27. 


vi. 3. 


32,6. 


vii. 8. 


19, 1530. 


xix. 8. 


22. 


vi. 27. 


24. 


x. 6. 


32. 


xiii. 29. 


27, 37. 


vii. 16. 


34,9. 


xvi. 2G. 


29,21. 


xii. 31. 






32, 30. 
49,811. 


xii. 16. 
xii. 17. 




JOSHUA. 


49,9. 


xiv. 3. 


2, 11. 


ii. 9. 






3, 1. 


x. 11. 




EXODUS. 


6, 5. 20. 


ib. 






14, 1. 


ib. 


3,6. 


xviii. 11. 






4,22. 


xi. 4. 






12,9. 


xii. 9. 




1 SAMUEL. 


23. 


xiii. 3. 






20, 12. 


vii. 15. 


2,6. 


vi. 27. 


19. 


xii. 13. 


9, 9. 11. 


xvi. 28. 


21,17. 


vii. 16. 






28, 36. 






2 SAMUEL. 


29,4. 


iii. 5. 






33, 1322. 


x.7. xii. 16. 


12, 1018. 


ii. 11, 12. 


34, 59. 


x. 8. 


16, 10. 11. 


ii. 12. 


40,6. 7.28. 


iii. 5. 


23, 2. 


xvi. 28. 



INDEX OF TEXTS. 



305 





1 KINGS. 


2, 11. 


xiv. l. i. 






7,9. 


i. 3. v. 2. 


1,4. 


xii. 21. 


12, 5. 


xiv. 4. 


13, 1. &c. 


ii. 14. 


14, 37. 


xii. 6, 7. 


19, 10. 


xii. 7- 


16, 110. 


xiv. 4. 


13. 


xii. 16. 


17,8. 


vi. 8. 


21, 29. 


ii. 13. 


18, 9. 


xii. 8. 


7 




19, 2. 5. 


ix. 6. 






22, 10. 


xii. 25. 




2 KINGS. 


15. 


xiv. 3. 






18. 


xiii. 26. 


2,911. 


xiv. 25, 26. 


23, 13. 


i. 6. 


5, 24, &c. 


xvi. 17. 


5. 


xxii. 7. 


16,2. 


xii. 22. 


24, 7. 


x. 19. xiv. 24. 






26, 5. 8. 12. 


xviii. 25. 






6. 


xxiii. 2. 


2 


CHRONICLES. 


30, 14. 


xiv. 4. 






31, 20. 


ii. 6. 


6, 18. 


xii. 9. 


32, 1. 


Intr. 15. i. 1. 


33, 12. 13. 


ii. 14. 


5. 


ii. 6. 






34,3. 


vi. 2. 






9. 


xxiii. 20. 




EZRA. 


35, 18. 


xviii. 25. 






36, 5. 


viii. 2. 


6, 15. 


xii. 19. 


8. 


xvii. 19. 






9. 


xiv. 5. 






38, 11. 


xiii. 9. 




NEHEMIAH. 


13, 14. 


xiii. 16. 






41, 9. 


xiii. 6. 


9,20. 


xvi. 28. 


45,6. 


xv. 28. xxi. 2. 






7. 


xxi. 2. 






10. 


vii. 12. 




JOB. 


46, 10. 


Intr. 13. i. 5. 






47,5. 


xiv. 24. 


5, 8. 9. 


viii. 8. 


50, 3. 


xv. 21. 


7,9. 


xviii. 14, 15. 


21. 


XV. 1. 


18. 


xiv. 5. 


51, 7. 


iii. 1. 


9, 8. 


xi. 23. xiii. 9. 


52, 10. 


i. 4. 


10, 11. 


ix. 15. 


55, 21. 


xiii. 9. 


12,8. 


xi. 11. 


59, 6. 


xiii. 9. 


24. 


xiii. 14. 


66, 1012. 


xxiii. 17. 


14, 7. &c. 


xviii. 15. 


68,5. 


vii. 10. 


19, 25. 26. 


ib. 


17. 18. 


xiv. 24, 25. 


26, 8. 


ix. 9. 


26. 


xviii. 25. 


29, 16. 


vii. 9. 


31. 


xvii. 25. 


36, 27. 


vi. 4. 


69, 21. 


xiii. 29. 


37, 16.22. 


viii. 8. ix. 9. 


72,5. 


vii. 3. xii. 10. 


38, 2. 3. 


ix. 1, &c. 


6. 


xii. 9. xv. 1, 10. 


11. 


ix. 11. 


17. 


xiii. 19. 


14. 17. 


xi. 23. 


74, 12. 


xiii. 28. 


28. 37. 


ix; 9. 


13. 


iii. 11. xiii. 36. 


39, 26. 


ix. 12. 


77, 19. 


xiii. 9. 


40, 19. 


viii. 4. 


80, 17. 


xii. 7. 


23. 


iii. 11. 


82, 6. 


Intr. 6. xi. 4. 


41, 13. 


iii. 11. 


85, 11. 


xiv. 11. 






87,4. 


ii. 9. 






88, 1. 48. 


xiii. 34. xiv. 1, 8. 




PSALMS. 


89, 29. &c. 


vii. 2. x. 4. xii. 23 






93, 2. 


xiv. 27. 


1, 5. 


xviii. 14. 


96, 11. 


iii. 1. 


2,3. 


xiii. 12. 


102,2628. 


xv. 3, 28. 


7. 


vii. 2. x. 2. xi. 5. xii. 19. 


103, 20. 


xxiii. 14. 


9. 


xii. 18. 


104, 2. 


XV. 1. 



30G 



INDEX OF TEXTS. 



104, 15. 
24. 25. 

105, 15. 

109, 13. 
25. 

110, 1. 
3. 
4. 

114,3. 

115, 17. 

116, 12. 
118, 22. 

24. 
119,91. 

103. 
126, 5. 
132, 6. 

II. 

17. 
139, 8. 

12. 

21. 

143, 10. 

144, 5. 

147, 14. 

148, 4. 
5. 
12. 

149, 1. 

150, 6. 



4,25. 
5, 3. 

15. 
6.6. 

27. 
17,6. 
20, 6. 
30, 21. 22. 



ix. 9. xxii. 9. 

ix. 11, 15, 16. 

xxi. 1. 

xiii. 9. 

xiii. 17, 30. 

iv. 14. x. 9. xiv. 28. 

vii. 2. xi. 5. 

x. 14. 

xii. 15. 

xviii. 14. 

xxii. 5. 

x. 3. 

xiii. 24. 

Tiii. 5. 

ix. 13. 

iv. 27. 

xii. 20. 

xii. 23. 

x. 15. 

viii. 2. 

Intr. 15. 

xvi. 10. 

xvi. 28. xvii. 5, 

xii. 7. 

xviii. 27. 

xi. 11. 

xi. 16, 23. 

xii. 34. 

xviii. 25. 

vi. 5. 



PROVERBS. 

ii. 2. 
iv. 2. 
xvi. 11. 
ix. 13. 

* " i 

11. 1. 

v. 2. viii. 6. 

v. 2. 

vi. 26. 



ECCLESIASTES. 



3,2. 

7,29. 

9, 7. 8. 
10, 4. 

11,9. 10. 
12, 16. $ 



xx. 4. 
ii. 1. 
xxii. 8. 
ii. 3. 

xv. 20. 



1,4. 

2, 10-12. 

3, 14. 
11. 

4, 1. 2. 
12. 
14. 



CANTICLES. 

iii. 2. 
xiv. 9, 10. 
xiv. 1113. 
xiii. 17. 
iii. 16. 
xiv. 5. 
xiv. 11. 



4, 15. 
5,1. 
3. 

12. 
6, 3. 

10. 

8,5. 



1, 6. 

8. 

16. 

18. 

19. 

20. 27. 
2,2. 

3. 
3, 9. 10. 

14. 
4,4. 
6, 16. 
6, 1. 

2. 
7,9. 

10. 14. 
8, 18. 
9,5-7. 
11,2. 

6. 

10. 
19, 1. 

25, 6. 7. 
8. 

26, 19. 

27, 11. 
18, 15. 

16. 
30, 10. 

34, 4. 

35, 4. 5. 6. 
38, 1. 3. 
40, 3. 

42, 1. 
45, 7. 

14. 

16. 17. 

47, 13. 

48, 16. 

49, 1. 2. 
13. 18. 

50, 6. 

51, 1. 
52,5. 
53, 1. 

4. 8. 9. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

12. 

55, 1. &c. 
57, 1. 2. 



xiv. 5. 

xiii. 32. xiv. 11. 

iii. 7. xv. 25. xx. 2. 

xiii. 9. 

xiii. 31. 

xiv. 5. 

iii. 16. 



ISAIAH. 

xii. 7- 

xvi. 18. 

i. 1. 

xv. 21. 

iv. 19. 

xviii. 34. 

xxi. 7. 

xviii. 34. 

xiii. 12. 

xii. 12. xiii. 12. 

iii. 16. 

xiii. ?9. 

xiv. 27. xvi. 16. 

xxiii. 6. 

v. 4. 

xi. 14. xii. 1, 2, 21, 22. 

i. 6. xiv. 30. 

xii. 24. 

xvi. 30. xvii. 5. 

xvii. 10. 

xii. 23. 

x. 10. 

xxi. 7. 

xii. 15. xix. 10. 

iv. 31. xviii. 15. 

xiv. 14. 

xix. 9. 

x. 3. xiii. 25. 

xiv. 14. 

xv. 3. 

xii. 12. xvii. 21. 

ii. 15. 

iii. 1. xviii. 34. 

xvi. 30. 

vi. 27. ix. 7. 

xi. 16. 

vi. 1. 

iv. 18. 

xvi. 30. 

x. 12. 

xviii. 34, 35. 

xiii. 13. 

xiii. 35. xiv. 3. 

xxiii. 12. 

xiii. 1, 13, 19. 

xiii. 34. 

x. 3. 

xi. 5. 

xiii. 3. xiv. 3. 

xiii. 30. 

xviii. 34. 

xiv. 3. XT. 3. 



INDEX OF TEXTS. 



7,4. 

59, 21. 

60, 1 . 8. 

61, 1. 
10. 

(i-2, 11. 

63, 1. 
11. 
16. 

64, 1. 
8. 

65, 2. 

15. 16. 
20. 

66, 1. 
8. 

18. 19. 



1,5. 

2,21. 
27. 
4,4. 
8, 4. 

11, 19. 

12, 16. 
32, 19. 
38, 6. 



3, 53. 

4, 20. 



xiii. 15. 

xvi. 30. 

xviii. 34. 

xvi. 30. xxi. 1. 

iii. 2. x xii. 8. 

x. 12. 

xiii. 27. 

xiv. 20. 

vii. 10. 

ix. I. 

vii. 8. 

xiii. 27, 28. 

x. 16. xviii, 35, 

xviii. 34, 

vi. 8. 

xviii. 34. 

xii. 8. 



JEREMIAH. 

xii. 25. 
ii. 1. it. 19. 
vii. 12. 
v. 6. 
ii. 5. 
xiii. 19. 
xiii. 1 ."&gt;. 
viii. 1. 
xiii. 12. 



LAMENTATIONS. 

xiii. 35. 

xiii. 7. xvii. 34, 



1, 6. &c. 

2,1. 

11,6.24. 
18, 20. 
31. 

28, 1217. 
36, 25. 
38, 1. 



2,34.44. 
4, 6. 

31. 

34. 

6, 2X 

7, 9 14. 
17. &c. 

8, 17. 

9, 25. &c. 



EZEKIEL. 

ix. 3. 

ix. 1. 

xvi. 14, 30. 

ii. 1, 

i. 1. 

ii. 4. 

iii. 16. xvi. 30. 

xviii. 1, 15. 

DANIEL. 

.\ii. 18. TV, 28. 

xvi. 31. 

ii. 18. 

viii. 5. 

v. 4. 

xv. 1, 21, 24, 27. 

xv. 13, 15, 16. 

i\. 1. 

xii. 19. 



10, 619. xii. 14. 

12, 1. xv. 16. 

2. iv. 31. xv. 17. xviii. 15. 

7. 11. 12. xv. 16. 



2,20. 

4,2. 
12. 

6, 3. 

9, 12. 
10, 6. 
13, 14. 



2, 28. 
31. 



1, 115. 

2, 39. 



3, 8. 

12. 
6,2. 

3. 

7,2. 



2, 1. 



HOSEA. 

xii. 26. 
xii. 6. xv. 3. 
xvi. 15. 
xiv. 14. 
xii. 26. 
xiii. 14, 
xiv. 17. 



JOEL, 

xvi. 29. xvii. 19. 
xv. 3. 



AMOS. 



2, 8. 


xii. 6. 


4, 13. 


x. 15. 


8, 9, 10. 


xiii. 25. 


11. 


xiii. 1. 


9,6. 


xiv. 24. 



JONAH. 

vi. 26. xiv. 17, 18. 
xiv. 20. 



MICAH. 

xvi. 29. 
xvi. 18. 
xi. 20. xii. 20. 
xii. 26. 
xii. 6. 



NAHUM. 

xvii. 12. 



HABAKKUK. 
3, 2. 3. xii. 20. 

ZEPHANIAH. 

3, 710. xiv. 6, 7. 
14. iii. 16. 



INDEX OF TEXTS. 



HAGGAI. 

2, 5. 6. xvi. 29. 

8. viii. 6. 



ZECHARIAH. 

1,6. xvi. 29. 

2, 10. xii. 8. 

4, 10. vi. 8. 

9,911. xii. 10, 17. xiii. 34. 

11, 12. 13. xiii. 10, 11. 

J2, 10. 12. xiii. 41. xv. 22. 

14, 4. xii. 11. 

6. 7. xiii. 24. 



1, 10. 
3, 1. 

25. 
4,2. 



MALACHI. 

iii. 25. 
xii. 8. 
xv. 2. 
xiii. 34. 



\MSDOM OF SOLOMON. 

6, !&lt;;. xvi. 19. 

7, 13. xv. 18. 
13, 5. ix. 2, 16. 

ECCLESIASTICUS. 

3, 21. 22. vi. 4. xi. 19. 

4, 31. xiii. 8. 

34, 9. 10. v. xxiii. 17. 



BARUCH. (vide iv. 35.) 

3, 3537. xi. 15. xii. 4. 

6. i. e. Epistle of Jeremiah, v. iv. 35. 



SONG OF THE THREE 
CHILDREN. 



v. 4. 6. 

27. 
32. 



ii. 16. 
ii. 18. 
ix. 3. 



HISTORY OF SUSANNAH. 
xvi. 31. 

BEL AND THE DRAGON. 
3336. xiv. 25. 



S. MATTHEW. 



1,1. 

20. 

23. 

24. 
2 2. 
3\ 6. 7. &c. 

11. 

16. 

17. 
4,5. 

11. 

17. 
5, 17. 

23. 24. 

45. 

48. 
6,9. 

24. 
7,6. 

9. 

8, 2426. 
9,3. 
10, 20. 

23. 

28. 

29. 

34. 

37. 
11,3. 

15. 

27. 

28. 

13, 2832. 
40. 

13, 13. 15. 
32. 
43. 

14, 2932. 
16, 1317. 

18. 
19. 

22. 23. 
17,2. 

20. 

18, 10. 
12. 
19. 

23. 35. 
19,1618.21 

26. 

29. 
20, 1215. 

16. 

18. 
21,9. 

19. 

31. 
22, 11. 

43. 



xi. 5. 
x. 12. 
xi. 14. 

xii. 31. 
xii. 9. 

* * if 

in. 7. 
iii. 9. 
x\ii. 9. 
x. 2. xi. 9. 
viii. 7. 

10. 

iii. 14. 
iv. 33. x. 18. 
xxiii. 3. 
vi. 16. 
vi. 8. 

vii. 7. xxiii. 11. 
iv. 4. 

i. 3. xvii. 36. 
v. 4. 
xiv. 17. 
v. 8. 
xvii. 4. 
xv. 16. 
viii. 3. 
vii. 6. 
vi. 27. 
vii. 15. 

iii. 6. v. 11. xiv. 19. 
xxi. 4. 
vii. 5. x. 1, 9. xvi. 24. 

iv. 7. vi. 6. x. 1. 
i. 1. 

iv. 16. xvi. 1. xvii. 11. 
xiv. 17. 

iv. 19. vi. 28, 29. 
v. 11. 

vii. 16. xi. 34. xvii. 18. 
v. 7. 
xi. 3. 
xvii. 25. 
xiv. 26. 
xiii. 5. 

x. 7. xiii. 13. 
v. 11. 

vi. (i. vii. 11. 
xv. 24. 
vi. 15. 
i. 6. 

viii. 6. xvii. 30. 
xvii. 29. 
xvii. 30. 
xiii. 31. xv. 7. 
xv. 7. 
xiii. 6. 

xii. 23. xv. 1. 
i. 4. 

iii. 8. x. 11. 
Intr. 3. iii. 2. 
xiv. 28. 



INDEX OF TEXTS. 



309 



23,2. 


xii. 23. 


3, 11. 


iii. 8. 


37. 


vi. 8. 


22. 


iii. 14. 


oo. 


xiii. 33. 


23. 


vi. 17. 


39. 


XV. 1. 


4,6. 


viii. 6. 


24,2. 


x. 11. xv. 15. 


41. 


x. 15. 


3. 


xv. 4. 


8, 18. 


vi. 28. 


415. 


xv. 59. 


9, 30. &c. 


xii. 16. 


15. 


iv. 15. 


62. 


xix. 8. 


16. 21. 22. xv. 16. 


10, 18. 


ii. 4. xiii. 31. xvi. 15. 


24. 


xv. 17. 


19. 


iii. 11. 


29. 


xv. 3. 


11, 13. 


xvii. 12. 


30. 31. 


xv. 21, 22. 


12, 11. 


xvi. 21. 


42. 44. 


xv. 4. 


28. 


vi. 16. 


25, 21. 


i. 2. iii. 2. 


49. 


vi. 27. 


29. 


vi. 28. 


15, 4. 5. 


xiii. 32. 


30. 


xv. 21, 22. 


7. 


i. 1. 


31. &c. 


xv. 24, 25. 


20. 


xvi. 30. 


35. 36. 


viii. 6. xv. 26. 


31. 


i. 1. 


41. 


vi. 27. xv. 26. 


16,9. 


i. 2. 


46. 


xviii. 29. 


17,5. 


v. 9. 


26, 20. &c. 


xiii. 6. 


34. 


xv. 2, 3. 


27. 28. 


xxii. 1, 7. 


21, 11. 


xv. 6. 


47. 


xiii. 9. 


28. 


xviii. 34. 


49. 




22, 48. 


xiii. 9. 


53. 


xiii. 12. 


23, 6. 7. 12. 


xiii. 14. 


62. 


xiii. 16. 


3243. 


xiii. 30, 31. 


64. 


xiv. 29. 


46. 


xiii. 33. 


27, 47. 10 


. xiii. 11. 


24, l.&c. 


xiv. 11, 12, &c. 


24. 25. 


xiii. 21. 


39. 40. 


xii. 33. 


2729. 


xiii. 1618, 27. 


49. 


xvi. 9. xvii. 12. 


51. 


xiii. 32. 






52. 53. 


xiv. 1618. 






6366. 


xiii. 4. xiv. 5. 




ST. JOHN. 


28, 17. 


xiii. 22. xiv. 12, 13.x. 10. 






9. 


xiv. 1, 13. 


1,1. 


iii. 14. xi. 10. xii. 1. 


11. 13. 


xiv. 14, 20. 


3. 


iv. 4. vi. 9. xi. 12, 21. 






10. 11. 


xi. 24. xii. 8. 






12. 


vii. 13. xi. 9. 




ST. MARK. 


14. 


xii. 1, 4. 






18. 


vi.5. vii. 11. ix. 1. xiv. 27. 


1,1. 


iii. 6. 


23. 


iii. 2. 


4, 34. 


vi. 29. 


29. 


xiii. 3, 19. 


9, 24. 


v. 9. x. 13. 


32. 33. 


iii. 14. xvii. 9. 


10, 38. 


iii. 10. 


2, 16. 


vii. 6. 


11, 14. 


xiii. 18. 


3, 3. 4. 5. 


iii. 4. xi. 9. xvii. 11. 


15, 23. 


xiii. 29. 


8. 


i. 2. 






14. 15. 


xiii. 20. 






16. IS. 


v. 10. xi. 6. 




ST. LUKE. 


34. 


xvii. 19. 






35. 36. 


x. 1. xi. 6. xviii. 30. 


1, 16. 


x. 10. xvii. 6. 


4, 14. 


xvi. 11. 


26. 


xii. 1. 


23. 24. 


xi. 6, 7. xvii. 11, 34. 


32. 


xii. 23. xv. 27. 


36. 


xviii. 20. 


35. 41. 


xii. 32. xvii. 6. 


5, 14. 


x. 13. 


44. 


iii. 6. xii. 26. 


17. 19. 


vii. 6. xi. 23. 


2, 4. 5. 


xii. 31. 


2126. 


xi. 13. 


7. 


XV. 1. 


22. 


xv. 25. 


10. 


x. 10. 


24. 


v. 10. xi. 6. xviii. 30. 


14. 


xii. 32. 


37- 


vi. 7. 


22. 


xii. 32. 


43. 


xil. 2. 


28, &c. 


x. 19. xvii. 7. 


6,46. 


vi. 6. vii. 11. 


33. 


vii. 9. 


54. 


xxii. 4. 


49. 


vii. 6. 


64. 


xvi. 13. 



310 



INDEX 01 TEXTS. 



7,19. 

38. 39. 
8,29. 

35. 
38. 

39. 41. 
8,44. 

49. 
56. 58. 

10, 9. 
15. 
18. 
30. 

11, 14. &c. 

12, 23. 
24. 
25. 

13, 4. 

14, 6. 
9. 
11. 
1626. 

15, 1. 
10. 
26. 

16, 715. 
17,5. 

10. 
25. 

18, 8. 

19, 11. 
17. 

26. 27. 
30. 
34. 
37. 
41. 

20, 1. 
17. 
19. 

22. 23. 
27. 



1, 5. 

7. 
12. 

19. 28. 
2,2. 

3. 4. &c. 
24. 
37. 38. 

3, 1. 2. 

4, 4. &c. 

5, 1. &c. 
11. 

6, 3. 
8,5. 

20. 

9, 1. &c. 
3242. 



xii. 33. 

xvi. 11. 

xv. 30. 

xv. 27. 

xi. 10. 

vii. 13, 14. 

xv. 14. 

vii. 5. 

xi. 20. 

vii. 2. x. 3. 

iv. 7. 

xiii. 6, 28. 

xi. 15. 

v. 9. 

xiii. 6. 

xviii. 6. 

xviii. 30. 

xii. 1. 

vii. 2. x. 3. xiii. 2. 

xi. 18. 

xi. 16. 

xvi. 14. xvii. 4, 11, 34. 

x. 5. xiv. 11. 

vii. 5. 

xvi. 4. xvii. 4, 11. 

ib. 

vii. 10. xi. 20. xiii. 6. 

xi. 23. 

vi. 16. 

vi. 26. 

viii. 5. 

xiii. 23. 

vii. 9. 

xiii. 32. 

iii. 10. xiii. 20. 

xiii. 41. 

xiii. 32. xiv. 5. 

xiv. 12. 

vii. 7. xi. 18. 

xiv. 11, 12. 

xiv. 22. xvii. 12. 

xiii. 39. 



ACTS. 

xvii. 14. 
xv. 4. 
x. 19. 

iv. 19. 

iii. 9. xvii. 13, 14. 

xvii. 15, 16, c. 

xiv. 19. 

iii. 15. 

xvii. 31. 

xvi. 17. xvii. 21. 

xvii. 22. 

xvii. 24. 

xiv. 7. xvii. 25. 

xvi. 10. 

x. 17, 18. xvii. 26. 

xvii. 27. 



10, 1. &c. xvii. 28. 

36. x. 10. 

38. xxi. 2. 

48. iii. 3. 

ll,l.&c.26. iii. 29. 

15, 130. xvii. 29. 
19, 40. xviii. 26. 
21,10.11. xiii. 22. v. xvii. 28, 31. 
26,28. xvii. 31. 

ROMANS. 

1, 3. xii. 23. xiv. 21. 

19. 28. iv. 19. 

2, 15. 16. xv. 25. 

4, 1 123. v. 5, 6. 

5, 10. xxiii. 5. 
12. 17. xiii. 2, 28. 
14. xv. 31. 
17. xiii. 2. 

20. xii. 15. xiii. 31. 

6,2 4. Intr. 2. iii. 1, 12. xx. 1,6. 

5. iii. 12. xx. 7. 

11. Intr. 5. 

12. xxiii. 13. 

13. xx. 8. 
19. iv. 19. 

22. xviii. 30. 

7, 16. iv. 19. 

23. xii. 15. 

8, 9. xvii. 4. 
11. xvii. 32. 

14. 15. vii. 14. xvii. 4, 5. xxiii. 5. 

17. iii. 15. 

18. xvi. 20. 
26. xvi. 20. 

28. Intr. 1. 

29. xxi. 1. 

34. xiv. 29. 

35. xv. 16. 

10, 6. xiv. 21. 
9. v. 10. 

11, 17. 24. xx. 3. i. 4. 
33. vi. 9. 

13, 14. xix. 10. 

14, 9. xv. 26. 
15,19.24. xvii. 26. 

21. xiii. 7. 
80. xvi. 32. 

16, 18. iv. 2. 

1 CORINTHIANS. 

1, 9. Intr. 6. v. 1. 
18.23. 24. xiii. 3, 8. vi. 18. 

2, 4. xiii. 8. 

9. vi. 9. 

10. 11. vi.l6.vi.6. xi. I3.xvi.23. 
13. xvii. 1. 

3, 12. 15. Intr. 1?. xv. 2. 

4, 15. vii. 9, 13. xi. 9. 

6, 9. 10. 11. iii. 8. 



INDEX OF TEXTS. 



311 



6, 19. 
7.5. 
8.9. 

8, 6. 
7. 

9, 22. 
10, 4. 

li. 
11,2. 

3. 

23. 
12, 14. 

8.9. 

28. 

14, 14. 
34. 

15, 1. 
3.4. 
520. 
16. 

2528. 
35. 36. 
49. 

53. 
55. 

16, 20. 



iv. 23. xii. 26. 

iv. 25. 

iv. 26. 

iv. 16. x. 1, 10. 

iv. 27. 

x. 5. 

x. 7. xiii. 34. 

Intr. 2. xxi. 6. 

xix. 8. 

xi. 14. xiii. 23. 

xxii. 1. 

xvi. 1. 

v. 11. xvi. 12. xvii. 2. 

xviii. 27. 

Intr. 14. 

Intr. 14. 

xiv. 1. 

xiii. 34. 

xiv. 21. 

xviii. 17. 

x. 9. xv. 2931. 

xviii. 17. 

xxiii. 11. 

xviii. 18. 

iii. 11. xiv. 19. 

xxiii. 3. 



2 CORINTHIANS. 



1, 3. 

2, 15. 

3, 14. 
18. 

4, 3. 4. 
5. 

7. 

5, 5. 
10. 

6, 7. 8. 
14. 
16. 

10, 14. 15. 

11, 14. 
13, 12. 



vi. 1. vii. 5. 

xxi. 4. 

xv. 32. 

xxi. 4. xxii. 9. 

vi. 28, 29. 

x. 17. 

x. 15. 

i. 2. 

xviii. 20. 

xviii. 27. 

vi. 13. x. 35. 

xii. 34. xxiii. 11. 

xv. 32. 

iv. 1. v. 12. xv. 4. 

xviii. 33. 



1, 8.9. 

16. 
3, 23. 24. 

27. 
4,4. 

6. 

26. 

5, 22. 23. 

6, 14. 



GALATIANS. 

v. 12. 
x. 18. 
iv. 33. 
xxi. 1. 
xii. 31. 
xvii. 4. 
xviii. 26. 
xvii. 38. 
xiii. 1. 



1, 3. 7. 8. 
5. 



EPHESIANS. 

xviii. 35. 
xxi. 1. 



1, 13. 17. xvii. 6, 35. xviii. 35. 
19. 20. xiv. 29. 

2, 4. 5. xviii. 35. 
10. ii. 1. 

3, 5. xvii. 33. 

14. 15. vii. 1, 5. xvii. 4. 

4, 5. Intr. 7. xvi. 24. 

10. xi. JO. xiv. 30. 

11. xiii. 29. 
22, 23. i. 2. 

30. xvii. 37. 

5, 11. vi. 19. 

25. xviii. 25, 33. 

26. iii. 5. 

6, 1. vii. 15. 
11. 14. xxi. 4. 

15. Intr. 16. 

16. v. 4. 
17.18. xvii. 33. 



PHILIPPIANS. 

1, 19. xvii. 4. 

2, 7. xv. 23, 25. 
11. vii. 5. 

3, 1. xviii. 34. 
19. xix. 6. 

4, 4. xviii. 34. 
13. xxi. 4. 



COLOSSIANS. 



1, 15. 18. 
16. 17. 
20. 

2, 8. 
10. 

11. 12. 
13. 14. 
15. 

3, 1. 
9. 
10. 
20. 



xiii. 23. 
iv. 4. xi. 24. 
xiii. 14, 33. 
iv. 1, 2. 
xiii. 23. 
v. 6. 
Intr. 17. 
xiii. 36. xx. 1. 
xiv. 29. 
iii. 7- xx. 2. 
i. 2. 
vii. 15. 



1 THESSALONIANS. 

4, 12. xviii. 17- 

15. &c. xiv. 30. xv. 19, 21. xviii. 
29. 

5, 21. 22. vi. 36. 
23. xxiii. 23. 



2 THESSALONIANS. 



2, 3. &c. 
4. 
9. 

10. 11. xv. 17. 
15. v. 12. 



xv. 9. 
xv. 15. 
xv. 14, 15. 



312 



INDEX OF TEXTS. 



1 


TIMOTHY. 


12,2. 


xiv. 29. 


1, 4. 


xvii. 33. 


15. 


Intr. 2. 


13. 14. 


x. 18. 


16. 


iv. 24. xv. 25. 


2, 5. 6. 


x. 5. xiii. 2. 


21. 


xii. 13. 


3, 15. 


\\iii. 25. 


13, 4. 


iv. 25. 


4,3. 


iv. 27. 


8. 


xii. 17. 


5, 21. 


v. 13. 






23. 


iv. 27. 




ST. JAMES. 


6, 1315. 


v. 13. 


1,2. 


xxiii. 17. 


20. 


xv. 33. 


5. 


xiii. 8. 


23. 


iv. 27. 


17. 


vii. 5. 






2, 23. 


v. 5. 


2 


TIMOTHY. 


7 




1, 14. 


xvii. 32. 




1 ST. PETER. 


2, 8. 
3,7. 
4, 3. 4. 


xii. 23. 
vide iv. 2. 
xv. 9. 


1, 11. 

17. 
19. 


xvii. 4. 
vii. 14. 
xix. 3. 






2,1. 


xxiii. 1. 




TITUS. 


46. 


x. 3. 


2, 11. 


xv. 2. 


6. 8. 


xiii. 35. 


3, 4. 


xviii. 35. 


22.23 


xiii. 3, 5. 


w, -* 

5. 


xix. 10. 


24. 


Intr. 5. xiii. 33. 






3,21.22 


xiv. 29. 




HEBREWS. 


5, 7. 
8. 


vii. 14. 
iv. 1. x. 3. xix. 1, 10. 


1,1. 


xi. 1. 


14. 


xxiii. 3. 


2. 


xi. 24. 






3. 


xiv. 25, 29. 




2 ST. PETER. 


6. 


ride xi. 4. 






8.9. 
13. 


xi. 16. 
xiv. 29. 


1,4. 
3, 13. 


xxii. 3. 
vide xv. 3. xviii. 15. 


2, 13. 
14. 


i. 6. 
iii. 11. xix. 4. 




1 ST. JOHN. 


3, 13. 


xv. 32. xxiii. 15. 






14. 
5,2. 
5. 


xxi. 1. 
x. 11, 14. 
x. 11. 


1, 8. 
9. 
2, 15. 


xxiii. 16. 
Intr. 6. 
vii. 14. 


13. 14. 


iv. 31. 


19. 


vi. 14. 


6, 18. 
7,3. 

21.24. 


x. 14. 
xv. 32. 
x. 14. 


20. 
22. 23 
27. 


xxi. 1. 
vii. 5. x. 1, 14. 
xxi. 7. 




26 


x. 4. 


3, 8. 


n. 4. 


44 \J 

9, 11. 
19. 


x. 16. xiii. 32. 
iii. 5. 


10. 

4, 18. 


vii. 13. 
xiv. 13. 


10, 1. 


xvii. 29. 


5, 1. 


xi. 7. 


12. 
15. 


xiv. 29. 
xvii. 33. 




2 ST. JOHN. 


19. 20. 


xiii. 32. 


11. 


vi. 19. 


22. 


iii. 4. 






29. 


xvii. 5. 




REVELATION. 


11, 1. 6. 


v. 1, 4. 






8. 9. &c. 


v. 5. 


5,5. 


x. 3. 


26. 27. 


x. 7. 


12,3. 


xv. 27. 



ERRATA. 

Page xi. line 5. for is read are 

38. note i, for Heer. i. 1. . 13. read Hser. iii. . 22. 



BAXTER, PRINTER, OXFORD. 



DEDICATED (BY PERMISSION) 
in HIS GRACE THE LORD ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY. 



LIBRARY OF FATHERS 

OF THE 

HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH, 

ANTERIOR TO THE DIVISION OF THE EAST AND WEST. 



TRANSLATED BY MEMBERS OP THE ENGLISH CHURCH, 

WITH NOTICES OF THE RESPECTIVE FATHERS, AND BRIEF NOTES BY THE EDITORS, 
WHERE REQUIRED, AND SUMMARIES OF CHAPTERS AND INDICES. 



EDITED BY 

THE REV. E. B. PUSEY, D.D. 

Regitts Professor of Hebrew, Canon of Christ Church, late Fellow of Oriel 6V/ 



THE REV. JOHN KEBLE, M.A. 

Professor of Poetry, late Fellow of Oriel College* 

THE REV. J. H. NEWMAN, B.D. 

Fellow of Oriel College. 



A PUBLICATION, answering to the above title, appeared to the Editors 
calculated to answer many and important ends, and to supply considerable 
wants, some peculiar to our own Church and times, others more general. 

Their chief grounds for thinking it very desirable were such as the fol 
lowing: 

1. The great intrinsic value of many of the works of the Fathers, which 
are, at present, inaccessible, except to such as have large libraries, and are 
familiar with the languages in which they are written; and this the more, 
since a mere general acquaintance with the language will not enable a 
person to read with ease many of the Fathers. E. g. Knowledge of 
Latin alone will not suffice to read Tertullian: and in cases less strong, 
ecclesiastical language and peculiarity of style will often present consider 
able difficulties at first. 

2. The desirableness of bringing together select works of different 
Fathers. Many who would wish to become acquainted with the Fathers, 
know not where to begin ; and scarcely any have the means to procure any 
great number of their works. Editions of the whole works of a Father, 
(such as we for the most part have,) are obviously calculated for divines, 
not for private individuals : they furnish more of the works of each Father 
than most require, and their expense precludes the acquisition of others. 

3. The increased demand for sacred reading. The Clergy of one period 
are obviously unequal to meet demands so rapid, and those of our day have 
additional hindrances, from the great increased amount of practical duties 
here so much is to be produced, there is of necessity great danger that 



much will not be so mature as, on these subjects, is especially to be desired 
Jur occupations do not leave time for mature thought. 

4. Every body of Christians has a peculiar character, which tends to 
make them look upon the system of faith, committed to us, on a particular 

e; and so, if they carry it on by themselves, they insensibly contract its 
limits and depth, and virtually lose a great deal of what they think th at 
they hold. While the system of the Church, as expressed by her Creed 
Liturgy, remains the same, that of her members will gradually becorn 
contracted and shallow, unless continually enlarged and refreshed I n 
ancient times this tendency was remedied by the constant living intercours( 
between the several branches of the Catholic Church, by the circulation \ 
the writings of the Fathers of the several Churches, and, in part, bv the 
present method-translation. \V e virtually acknowledge the necessity ( 
such accessions by our importations from Germany and America - but the 
circumstances of Germany render mere translation unadvisable, and most 

the American Theology proceeds from bodies who have altered the do 
trine of the Sacraments. 

5 The peculiar advantages of the Fathers in resisting heretical errors 
hat they had to combat the errors in their original form, before men s 
minds were familiarized with them, and so risked partaking of them - 
also in that they lived nearer to the Apostles. 

The great comfort of being able to produce, out of Christian antiquity 
refutations ot heresy, (such as the different shades of the Arian ) thereby 
ayoidmg the necessity of discussing, ourselves, profane errors, which, on so 
high mysteries, cannot be handled without pain, and rarely without injury 
to our own minds. 

7. The advantage which some of the Fathers (e. g. St. Chrysostom) 
possessed as Commentators on the New Testament, from speaking its lan 
guage. 

The value of having an ocular testimony of the existence of Catholic 
enty and Catholic agreement; that truth is not merely what a man 
troweth; that the Church once was one, and spake one lano-ua-e a-ic 
that the present unhappy divisions are not necessary and unavoidable 

he circumstance that the Anglican branch of the Church Catholic 
is founded upon Holy Scripture and the agreement of the Universal Church- 
and that therefore the knowledge uf Christian antiquity is necessary m* 
order to understand and maintain her doctrines, and especially her Creeds 
and her Liturgy. 

10. The importance, at the present crisis, of exhibiting the real practical 
value of Catholic Antiquity, which is disparaged by Romanists in order to 
make way for the later Councils, and by others in behalf of modern and 
private interpretations of Holy Scripture. The character of Catholic anti 
quity, and of the scheme of salvation, as set forth therein, cannot be ap 
preciated through the broken sentences of the Fathers, which men pick up 
out of controversial diumty. 

11. The great danger in which Romanists are of lapsing into secret infi- 
.ty not seeing how to escape from the palpable errors of their own 

mrch, without falling into the opposite errors of Ultra-Protestants It 
appeared an act of especial charity to point out to such of them as are dissa 
tisfied with the state of their own Church, a body of ancient Catholic truth, 
free from the errors, alike of modern Rome and of Ultra-Protestantism. 

12. Gratitude to ALMIGHTY GOD, who has raised up these great lights 
in the Church of Christ, and set them there for its benefit in all times? 



PLAN OF THE WORK. 

1. The subjects of the several treatises to be published shall mainly be, Doctrine, 
Practice, Exposition of Holy Scripture, Refutation of Heresy, or History. 

2. The treatises shall be published entire, so as to form a whole. 

3. The notices of the respective Fathers shall be confined to such brief accounts of 
them (mostly taken from ancient sources) as shall put the general reader in possession 
of their age, character, and the like. 

4. The notes shall be limited to the explanation of obscure passages, or references, 
or to the removal of any misapprehension which might not improbably arise (after the 
manner of the Benedictines). 

5. The best editions shall be procured for the Translators 

6. Each volume shall consist either of a work or works of a single Father, or of those 
of several Fathers upon the same subject, or connected subjects, as in selections of 
Homilies. 

7. Each volume (or at most two volumes) shall form a whole in itself; but the 
volumes shall be continued uniform, so that those who wish for fuller sets, may be ablf 
to obtain them. Each volume to contain from 400 to 600 pages. 

8. The Editors hold themselves responsible for the selection of the several treatises 
to be translated, as also for the faithfulness of the translations ; they will, however, 
thankfully receive any hints upon the subject, especially from divines, or their eccle 
siastical superiors. 

9. The work shall be published in closely printed 8vo volumes; and with as much 
attention to cheapness as is consistent with the good execution of the work, and the 
necessary remuneration of the Translators and Booksellers. 

10. The Editors have assented to the suggestion of the Publishers, that the work 
should be published by subscription, in the hope that its price may thereby be consi 
derably reduced, in consequence of the increased number of copies printed. The Editors 
declining all pecuniary profit, that arising from the additional copies printed, will go to 
the reduction of the price of the whole. It must, however, be distinctly understood, 
that the Editors hold themselves under no responsibility to the Subscribers, as such, 
with regard to the choice of the works to be translated. 

11. The originals of the works translated shall be printed, either at once or subse 
quently, if this shall appear desirable. It would be well, therefore, if Subscribers would 
specify, if they wish for the originals, either with or without the translations. 

12. It is understood that subscriptions continue, until it be intimated that they are 
discontinued, and that they extend, under ordinary circumstances, to the end of each 
year. It will be arranged, however, that the works of each year should form a whole ; 
so that the subscription might be broken off without inconvenience to the Subscriber. 

13. Subscriptions might be confined, if desired, to certain larger works (as St. Chry- 
sostom on the Epistles of St. Paul), but this obviously would be too complicated to be 
extended to works of small compass. 

14. Four volumes are to appear in each year : the price to Subscribers not to exceed 
9s. for a closely printed 8vo of 400 pages; to the public it will be raised one-fourth. 
When old Translations are revised, the price will be diminished. 

15. No volume can be subscribed for after it is published; but the Subscription Lift 
remains open for the future volumes. 



RIVINGTONS, LONDON. J. H, PARKER, OXFORD. 



Works already published. 



AUGUSTINE, S ........... * Uh thC Lailn Translation and Text, 



C\ R1L.S.OFJERUSALEM Catechetical Discourses ..... R. W. Church, B.A. Fellow of Oriel- 
CYPRIAN, S ............. Treatises, ............... Rev. C\ Thornton, M. A. Christ Church. 



In the Press. 



CHRYSOSTOM, S First Epistle to the Corinthians 

Galatians, Epl 
Philippians 

CYRIL,S.OFJERUSALEM The Original 



First Epistle to the Corinthians 7 
Galatians, Ephesians, and v ride below. 
Philippians 



Preparing for Publication. 



AMBROSE, S Doctrinal Treatises F. Rogers, M.A. Fellotv of Oriel. 

Epistles. 

AniANASlUS.S Four Orations against ^l On e of the Editors. 

Arums ) 

Tracts on the Incarnation and 

Holy Spirit. 
Historical Documents Rev. M. Atkinson, M. A. Felloiv of Lincoln. 

AUGUSTINE, S Anti-Pelagian Tracts Ren. F. Oakeley, M.A. Fellow of Balliol. 

Homilies on St. John s Gospel Rev. C. A. Heurtley, M.A. Fellow of C. C. C. 

First ) 
Epistle . . J 

the Psalms .... 

Practical Treatises Rev. C. L. Cornish, M.A. Fellow of Exeter. 

]. ( ,istles Rev. II- JJ~. Wilberforce, M.A. Oriel. 

City of God Old Translation revised. 

BASIL, S. THE GREAT .... Letters, Treatises, and Ho- "I R h m iliams, M.A. Fellow of Trinity. 

imlies ( 

CHRYSOSTOM, S Homilies on St. Matthew Rev. Sir G. Prero.it, M.A. Oriel. 

St. John Rev. J. Nelson, M.A. St. John s. 

,-Rcv. T. Keble, M.A lute Fellow of C. C. C. 
1 Rev. W. J. Copcland, M.A. Fellow of Trinity. 

Her. J. Mcdlnj, M.A. Wndlimn. 
n i Rev. C. Miller, M.A. late Demy of Magdalen. 

M&gt; l aul &lt; Rev. H. K. Cornish, MA. late Fellow of Exeler. 

/, , r. // . r. Cotton, M.A. Student ofCh. Ch. 
\ Rev. A. Grant, M.A. Fvllotv of New College. 
[.V. F. Mood, M.A. Oriel. 

On the Priesthood The late Bp. Jebb, finished by Rev. J. Jebb, M.A. 

Epistles Rev. E. Churton, M.A. Christ Church. 

CYPRIAN, S Epistles Rev. H. Carey, M.A. Worcester College. 

" DRIA l Against Ncstorias Rev. J. H. Newman, B.D. 

EPHRAEM SYRUS, S. Homilies Rev. J. B. Morris, M-A. Fellow of Exeter. 

EUSEBIUS Ecclesiastical History. Rev. G. H. S. Johnson, M..4. Queen s. 

GREGORY, S. THEOLO- ? c 
GUS, OF NAZIANZUM } Sermons Pev R F Wilson, M.A. Oriel. 

GREGORY, S. OF N YSSA . . Sermons and Commentaries. .Rev. C. Seager, M.A. late Scholar of Worcester. 

HILARY, S On the Trinity Rev. A. Short, M.A. late Student of Christ Churcl, 

IRENJEUS, S Against Heresy Rev. J. Kcblf, M. A. 

JEROME, S Epistles Rev. J. Motley, M.A. Oriel. 

JUSTI N, M Works Rev. H. E Manning, M.A. late Fellow of Merton. 

LEO, S. THE GREAT Sermons and Epistles Rev. J. H. Newman, B.D. 

MACARIUS, S Sermons Old Translation revised. 

OPTATUS, S On the Donatist Schism Rev F. A. Faber, B.A. Felloiv of University. 

ORIGEN Against Celsus Rev. T. Mozley, MA. late Fellow of Oriel. 

TERTULLI AN Works Rev. C. Dodgson, M.A. late Student of Ch. Ch&gt; 

THEODORET, &c Ecclesiastical History Rev. C. Marriott, M.A. Fellow of Oriel. 

Compendium of Heresies) 
and Dialogues / Kev R - *"&gt; M A - 

MISCELLANIES St. Clement of Alex. " Quis 

d ves salvetur?" Ep. ad 
Diognetum; Tracts of Hi p- 
polytns. 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



Those marked with an * are subscribers to both the Texts and the Translations. 

Those marked t to the Texts only. 

Those not marked, to the Translations only. 



*His Grace The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. 

His Grace The Lord Archbishop of York. 

Right Hon. and Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of London. 

Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Lincoln. 

Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Bangor. 

Hon. and Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Oxford. 

*Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Rochester. 

Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol. 

Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Exeter. 

*Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Chichester. 

Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Ripon. 

Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Barbados. 

Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Edinburgh. 

*Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Aberdeen. 

Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Ross and Argyll. 

Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of North Carolina, 2 copies. 

Right Rev. Bishop Luscombe, Paris. 



Abbiss, Rev. J. Adams, W. Esq. Merton Coll. 

*Aberdeen Diocesan Library Adare, Viscount 

A. 13. for the Theological College, Addison, Rev. B.St.Peter s Coll. Camb. 

Illinois, N. A. Addison, W. F. Esq. Wadham 

t Ackland,T.S.Esq. St. John sColl.Camb. Agnew, Mrs. Western Pavilion,Brighton 

Acklom, J. Esq. Downing Coll. Camb. *Ainger, W. D. D. St. Bees, near 

Acland, Sir Thomas Dyke, Bart. M.P. Whitehaven 

Acland, T. D. Esq. M.P. All Souls Alexander, John, Esq. 

Coll. Allen, A. Esq. Clifton 

Acland, Henry, Esq. Ch. Ch. Allen, Rev. Jas. Castle Martin, Pem- 

Acland, P. Leopold, Esq. Ch. Ch. brokeshire 

Acland, Arth. II. Dyke, Esq. Kellerton Allen, Rev. John, King s Coll. London 

Park Allen, Rev. P. \\estbourn, Sussex 

Adams, Rev. D. one of the Vicars of Allies, Rev. T. \V. 

Bampton Allwood, Rev. Robt. Clifton 

Adams, Rev. II. G. Ambrey, Mr. C. Bookseller, Manchester 

*Adams, John, jun. Esq. Anderdon, John L. Esq. 



2 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



*Anderdon, W. H. Esq. University Coll. 
Anderson, Rev. D. Exeter Coll. 
Anderson, Rev. Philip, Gateshead 
Anderson, Rev. Robert, Brighton 
Anderson, Rev. Sir C. Barf. Lea 
Andrew, Rev. John, St. John s Coll. 
Andrewes, Rev. W. Sudbury 
Anstey, Rev. George, Acomb Hall 
Anstice, Mrs. Joseph 
Antrobus, Rev. John 
Armstrong, Rev. J. Binder, SomefSet 
Armstrong, Rev. J. Wallsend 
*Arnold, Rev.T. K. Lyndon, Rutland 
Ashby de la Zouch, Theological Library 
Ashington, Miss, Little Saxham 
Ashworth, Rev. J. H. East Woodlay 
t Atkinson, Rev. M. Lincoln Coll. 
Attersall, Miss M. 
Aubin, Rev. Philip, Jersey 
Audland, Rev. W. F. Queen s Coll. 
Austin, Rev. J. T. Aldworth, Berks 
Awdry, Rev. C. New Coll. 



*Bacon, R. W. Esq. King s Coll. Camb. 

Badeley, E. Esq. 

*Bagge, Rev. James, Lincoln 

Bagot, G. T. Esq. Exeter Coll. 

Bailey, Rev. VVm. 

Baillie, Evan, Esq. Trinity Coll. 

Baker, C. F. Esq. Exeter Coll 

Baldwin, Rev. C. F. St. John s Coll. 

fBalston, H. Esq. Magd. Coll. 

jBandinel.Rev.Bulkeley, D.D. Bodleian 

Librarian 

Barber, Rev. W. Wigston 
tBaring, Re?. C. Kingsworthy, Hants 
Barker, Rev. H. Raymond, MerU Coll. 
Barker, Rev. C. Raymond, Oakridge 
Barker, F. Raymond, Esq. Oriel Coll. 
Barlow, Rev. T. 
Barne, Rev. Henry, Tiverton 
Barnes, Venerable Archdeacon, Sowton, 

Exeter 

Barnstaple Clerical Book Club 
*Barrow, Rev. John, Queen s Coll. 
Barter, Rev. W. B. Burghclere, New- 

bury, Berks 



Bartholomew, Alfred, Esq. 

Bartholomew, Rev. John, Morchard, 
near Crediton 

Bartholomew, Rev. C. C. Exeter 

Barton, Rev. J. H. Wicken, North 
ampton 

Batcheller, Mr. Bookseller, Dover 

Bath Clerical Society 

Baxter, Arthur, Esq. 

Bayford, John, Esq. 

Bayley, W. R. Esq. Bath 

*Bayly, Rev. W. H. R. Stapleton, near 
Bristol 

Bayne, Rev. Thos. Vere, Warrington 

Baynes, Mr. A. C. Bookseller, Liver, 
pool 

Beaden, Rev. Hyde 

Beadon, Rev. Rich, a Court, Cheddar, 
Somerset 

Beaufort, Rev. D. A. 

Beckwith, Rev. S. B. Tilehurst, Sussex 

Begbie, Esq. Pemb. Coll. Camb. 

Beitch, Rev. W. D. 

Bell, Rev. Henry, Ruddington 

Bell, Rev. John, Oulton 

Bellairs, Rev. H. W. Bedworth 

* Bellamy, Rev. J.W. Merchant Taylors 
School 

Bellasis, Edward, Esq. 

*Bellingham, Rev. J. G. Spa, Glouces 
tershire 

Bennett, Rev. E. Leigh, Lechlade, Glou 
cestershire 

Berkeley, Rev. G. C. Pembroke Coll. 

Berry, Rev. P, Dublin 

Bethune, Rev. G, 

Be van, R. Esq. Rougham 

Bickersteth, Rev. E. Rector of Watton, 
Herts. 

Birch, Rev. E. Weston 

Bird, Rev. Godfrey, Great Wigborough, 
Essex 

Biron, Rev. Edwin, Hythe, Kent 

Blackburn, Rev. Peter, Castle Combe, 
Chippenham 

Blackburn, Rev, E. P. Royston 

Blackwell, Rev. Wra. Morden, Surrey 

Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh 

Blair, Mrs. 

Blakiston, Rev. R. Chichester 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



Blandy, Rev. Francis J. Netheravon, 

Amesbury, WilU 

Blencowe, Miss Caroline, Dawlish 
*Blew, Rev. W. J. Nuthurst, Sussex 
*Bliss, Rev. James, Bradford 
Bliss, Rev. W. Bath 
Blower, Esq. Wolverhampton 
Bloxam, Rev. J. R. Magd. Coll. 
Blunt, Rev. W. Swaffham 
Boissier, Rev. Mr. Malvern Wells 
Boissier, Rev. G. R. Penshurst 
Bolster, Mr. L. H. Bookseller, Cork 
Bond, Rev. N. Holme House, Dorset 
*Bonney, Rev. Thos. Rugeley 
tBorrodaile, Rev. A. Ch. Ch. 
Bosanquet, Rev. Edwin, Brightwell 

Baldwin, Watlington, (Chrysostom) 
*Bosanquet, Rev. R. N. 
Bosanquet, James, Esq. 
Bosanquet, S. Esq. East Woodhay, 

Newbury 

Bosanquet, W. H. Esq. 
Bosanquet, S. Esq. Montagu Place 
Bourke, Rev. S. 
*Bowden, J. W. Esq. 
Bowdler, Rev.T. Sydenham 
tBowstead, Rev. J. Greetham near 

Horncastle 
Bowyear, Rev. T. K. Hartlip near 

Sittingbourne 

Boyle, Rev. John, Wolverhampton 
Bradford, Rev. Audley End, Essex 
Bradshaw, J. Esq. Nottingham 
*Bramston, Rev. John, Great Baddow 
Bray, Rev. E. A. 
Brereton, Chas. Esq. New Coll. 
Brereton, Rev. John, New Coll. 
Brett, Mr. Stoke Newington 
*Brewer, Rev. J. S. Queen s Coll. 
Brickwood, W. Esq. St. Mary Hall 
Bridges, B. C. Esq. Oriel Coll. 
Bridges, Brook Edw. Esq. Mert. Coll. 
tBridges,Rev.A. II. Beddingion House, 

near Croydon 
Bridges, Rev. C. Old Newton, Stow- 

market 

Bright, Rev. J. Lyelbury, North Salop 
*Brine, James G. Esq. St. John s Coll. 
Bristol Literary Society 
Brodie, B. C. Esq. Balliol Coll. 



Brockman, Rev. J. St. Clement s, Sand 
wich, Kent 

Brogden, Rev. James 

Brooke, Rev. W. 

Brooksbank, C. Esq. Ch. Ch. 

Broughton, H. V. Esq. St. Peter s Coll. 
Cambridge 

Broughton, Rev. B. S. Washington, 
Durham 

tBrowell, Rev. W. R. Pembroke Coll. 

Brown, Rev. E. Leeds 

fBrown, Rev. Henry, Chichester 

Brown, Rev. Henry, Tunbridge 

* Browne, Rev.R.W. King s Coll. London 
Brown, Rev. W. L. Ch. Ch. 
Browne, Rev. T. C. Magdalen Hall 
Browne, Rev. W. R. Gisleham 
Browne, Mr. Emmanuel Coll. Camb. 
Bruce, Lewis, Esq. Balliol Coll. 
Bryant, Mr. L. Bookseller, Gloucester 
Brymer, Ven. Archdeacon, Pulteney 

Street, Bath 
*Buchanan, Mrs. Dursley, Gloucester. 

shire 

Buck, Esq. Jersey 
Buckerfield, Rev. F. H. Little Bedwin 

* Buckley, Rev. Joseph, Hillsley 
Budge, Rev. M. Llanelly 
Bukett, T. Esq. Malton 

Bull, Rev. John, D.D. Canon of Ch.Ch. 

Buller, Rev. A. Mary Tavy, Tavistock 

Buller, John Edw. Esq. 

Burlton, Rev. J. F. 

Burnaby, Rev. Robt. Leicester 

Burney, C. Esq. Magdalen 

Burns, Mr. I. 

Burrows, Rev. H. N. Hull College 

* Burrows, H. W. Esq. St. John s Coll. 
Burton, T. Esq. St. Peter s Coll. Cam 
bridge 

*Bute, The Marquis of 
Butler, Rev. D. Coventry 
Butler, Rev. I. Inkpen, Newbury 
Butler, Rev. Jas. York 
Butler, Rev. T. Midhurst 
Buttemer, Rev. Mr. Aldham 
Butterworth, Rev. J. Bradford, Yorkshire 
Butterworth, Rev. J. II. Exeter Coll, 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



Cambridge, Ven. G. A. Archdeacon of, 

Middlesex 

Capes, Rev. J. M. Balliol Coll. 
Capper, Ilev.D. Huntley, Gloucestershire 
Capper, Rev. George, Wherstead 
Caroy, I- L. Esq. Philadelphia 
*Carey, Rev. H. Oriel Coll. 
Carlyon, Rev. E. 
Carlyon, Rev. Philip, Colchester 
Carter, Rev. John, St. John s CoU. 
Carter, Rev. Mr. Bristol 
Cartwright, Rev. J. l&gt;. 
Carvvardine, Rev. C. W. Tolleshunt 

Knights, Essex 
Case, Rev. James 
Cator, Rev. John, Wakefieid 
Caulfield, Rev. \V. Kerry 
Cavendish, Hon. and Rev.A.Hampstead 
Cavendish, Hon. Richard 
*Chaflfers, Rev. T. Brasen-nose Coll. 
Chambers, J. D. Esq. 
Champernowne, H. Esq. Ch. Ch. 
Chandler, Rev. J. Witley 
Chapman, Rev. J. M. Balliol Coll. 
Cheetham Library, Manchester 
Chepmell, Rev. 11. L. M. Pemb. Coll. 
Chessyre, Rev. W. J. Worcester 
Chester, Rev. Anthony, Epsom 
Cheyne, Rev. Mr. Aberdeen 
Chichester, Dean and Chapter of 
Christie, Rev. Mr. Badgworth, near 

Cheltenham 

*Church, R. W. Esq. Oriel Coll. 
*Churton, Rev. Edw. Crayke, near 

Easingwold 
Clarke, Rev.E.W.G real Yeldham, Essex 

Clarke, Rev.H. Danvers, Exeter Coll. 
Clark, B. S. Esq. 
Clark, Fred. Esq. 

Clark, G. N. Esq. Newcastle-on-Tyne 
Clark, Mr. Wm. Manchester 
Clark, Rev. J. W. Leeds 
Clark, Rev. John. Leeds 
Clark, Rev. J. Dixon, Belford 
Clayton, Rev. J. H. 
Clayton, Esq. Twickenham 
Clayton, Mr. Chas. Manchester 
Claxsson, Rev. B. S. D.D. Gloucester 
*Cleaver, Rev. J. F. Great Cox well 
Berks 



*Clements, Jacob, Esq. Oriel Coll. 
Cleoburey, Rev.C. Steeple Aston.OxoD. 
Clerke, Ven. C. C. Archdeacon of 

Oxford 

*Clerke, Rev. Wm. Melton Mowbray 
Clifton, Mrs. Kensington 
*Clissold, Rev. A. Stoke Newington 
Clutterbuck, Rev. H. Exeter Coll. 
Cockin, M. Esq. Queen s Coll. Camb. 
Cocks, lion, and Rev. J. S. Worcester 
fCocks, Charles, Esq. 
*Codd, Mr. St. John s Coll. Camb. 
Coffin, R.A. Esq. Ch. Ch. 
Coit, Rev. T. D. President of the 

Transylvanian University, U. S. 
*Coleridge, Hon. Mr. Justice 
Coleridge, Rev. E. Eton Coll. 
Coleridge, F. G. Esq. Ottery St. Mary 
*Coleridge, H. N. Esq. 
fColeridge, Rev. Derwent, Helliston, 

Cornwall 

Coles, Rev. G. Croydon 
Colley, Rev. James, Shrewsbury 
Collings, Mr. E. Bookseller, Bath 
tCollins, C. M. Esq. Exeter Coll. 
tCollis J. D. Esq. Worcester Coll. 
Collison, Rev. F. W. St. John s, Camb. 
Coltman, Rev. George, Stickney, 

Lincolnshire 

tColson, C. Esq. Cambridge 
Colvile, Frederick L. Esq. Trinity 
Colville, James W. Esq. 
Combe and Crossley, Leicester 
Combs, John, Esq. 
Compigne, D. Esq. Gosport 
Compton, Rev. W. Berwick. on-T weed 
Constable, Esq. Jesus College, Cambridge 
Cooper, Rev. E. P. Vicarage, Burford, 

Oxon. (Tr. of S. Chrys.) 
Cooper, Rev. R. Howe, Norfolk 
Copeland, Rev. W. J. Trinity Coll. 
*Copleston,Rev.Reginald E. ExeterColl. 
tCopleston, Rev. W. J. Oriel College, 

(Chrysostom) 
Corbett, Ven. S. Archdeacon of York, 

Wortley, Sheffield 
*Cornish,Rev.Dr.King s School, Ottery 

St. Mary 
Cornish, Rev. Hubert K. Merton 

Vicarage, Oxfordshire 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



Cornish, Rev. C. L. Exeter Coll. 
*Cornthwaite, Rev. T. Hornsey 
*Cory, Isaac Preston, Esq. 
Cosserat.G. P.Graham, Esq. Exeter Coll. 
Cotes, Rev. Peter, Litchfield, Hants 
Cotton, Rev.R.L. Provost of Wore. Coll. 
*Cotton, Rev. W. C. Ch. Ch. 
Cotton, William, Esq. Bank of England 
Couitenay, Lord, Powderham Castle 
*Courtenay, Francis, Esq. Exeter Coll. 
Coventry Religious and Useful Know 
ledge Society 

Coventry Theological Book Society 
Cowie, Mr. St. John s Coll. Cambridge 
*Cox, Rev. W. H. St. Mary Hall 
*Cox, Rev. J. Walgrave 
Coxson, Rev. Mr. Davenham, Cheshire 
Coxwell, Mr. G. S. Newcastle 
Cragg, Rev. Richard, Wymondham 
Craufurd, Rev. R. G. Magd. Hall 
*Crawford, Rev. Mr. Leeds 
Crewe, Lord, Trustees of, 
Crichlose, Rev. M. Poundstock, Corn 

wall 

Cricklan, Rev. M. 
Cross, Mr. John, Bookseller, Leeds 
fCureton, Rev. W. British Museum 
Currer, Miss, Eshton Hall, Yorkshire 
*Currey, Mr. St.John s Coll. Cambridge 
*Currie, Rev. James, Barnes, Surrey 
Currie, Rev. Horace G. Milford 
Currie, Rev. James, Jersey 
Curties, Rev. T. C. St. John s Coll. 
Curry, Mr. W. Bookseller, Dublin 



Dalgairns, J. D, Esu. Exeter Coll. 
*Dalton, Rev. W. Lloyd House, Wolver- 

hampton 

Dalton, Rev. W. Inworth 
*Dalton, Rev. C. B. Wadham Coll. 
*Daman, Rev. Charles, Oriel Coll. 
Danby, T. B. Esq. Kendal 
*Dansey, Rev. Wm. 
*Darby, Rev. Christopher, Knocktopher 
Darnell, Rev. W. Stanhope, Durham 



Darling, Mr. Sf. John s Coll. Cambridge 
*Darling, Mr. Bookseller, Little Queen 

Street, London 

Dasent, G. W. Esq. Magdalen Hall 
Davies, Rev. E. Leominster 
Davies, Rev. J. Abbenhall, Gloucester 
shire 
Davies, Rev. W. L. Elizabeth College, 

Guernsey 
Dawson, C. Esq. 

Dawson, G. Esq. M.A. Exeter Coll. 
*Dawson, J. Esq. Exeter Coll. 
Dayman, Rev. E. A. Exeter Coll. 
tDeacon, Rev. G. E. C. C. C. 
Dealtry, Rev. Dr. Clapham 
*Dean, Rev. W. S. Abdon 
Dean, Rev. Mr. Exeter 
Deane, Rev. H. Gillingham, nr. Shaftes- 

bury 

Debrisay, Rev. J. T. 
Deedes, Rev. Gordon 
Delafosse, Mrs. Addiscombe 
Demain, Rev. Henry, Hertford 
*Demainbray, Rev. Mr. Bilton, near 

Rugby 

De Tessier, A. P. Esq. C. C. C. 
De Tessier, G. Esq. C.C.C. 
Dewhurst, Rev. John 
Dickinson, F. H. Esq. 
*Dimsdale,Charles,Esq.Essendon Place, 

Herts. 

Dingwall, Charles, Esq. 
Dixon, Rev. James, Sheffield 
Dodd, Rev. W. Newcastle-on-Tyne 
*Dods\vorth, Rev. William 
tDonkin, W. F. Esq. Univ. Coll. 
Donne, Rev. Jas. Bedford 
Dornforti, Rev. J. Oriel Coll. 
Douglas, Edward, Esq. Ch. Ch. 
Douglas, Rev. H. \Vhickham, Durham 
Dowding, Rev. Mr. Salisbury 
tDowling, Rev. B. C. Devizes 
Downes, Rev. J. 
Downes, Rev. R. Leamington 
Driver, Rich. Esq. Manchester 
Drummond, Henry, Esq. Albury Park, 

Guildford 

Diummond, Rev. Spencer II. Brighton 
Drummond, Rev. R. Feering 
Drury, Henry John, Worcester Coll. 



G 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



Duffield, Rer. R. Frating, near Col 
chester 

Dugard, Rev. Geo. Manchester 
t Dukes, R. M. Esq. Lincoln Coll. 
Dundas, Win. Pitt. Esq. 
tDunn, John, Esq. Writer, Aberdeen 
Dunn, Rev. John 

Dunnington, Rev. Joseph, Thicket Hall 
*Dunster, Rev. Mr. Tottenham 
Dyer, Rev. J. H. Waltham, Essex 
Dyke, Rev. Henry, Cottisford, Oxon. 
Dymock, Rev. J. Rector of Roughton 
Dyraock, Rev. W. G. Hatch Beau- 
champ, Ilminster 

Dyson, Rev. C. Dogmersfield, 2 copies 
Dyson, Rev. F. Tidworth 



Eslcourt, T. G. Bucknall, Esq. M.P. 

Estcourt, Gloucestershire 
Estcourt, Rev. E. W. Tx)ng Newnton, 

Wilts 

fEstcourt, E. E. Esq. Exeter Coll. 
Evans, Herbert N. M.D. Hampstead 
Evans, Rev. Thomas, Gloucester 
Evans, Rev. Lewis, Vicar of Llanfi- 

hangel, Cardiganshire 
Evans, Rev. W. Burlton Court 
*Evans, Rev. T. S. Brompton 
Evans, Rev. A. B. D.D. Market Bos- 
worth, Leicestershire 
Ewing, W. Esq. Lincoln Coll. 



Eaton, Rev. H. C. Stetch worth, New 
market 

Eaton and Sons, Booksellers, Worcester 
Eden, Rev. R. Peldon, Essex 
Edge, Rev. W. J. Waldringfield, Wood- 
bridge 

Edgell, Rev. E. East Hill, Frome 
Edmonstone, Sir Charles, Bart. Colgium 
Edmonstone, Rev. C. 
Edwards, Rev. A. Magd. Coll. 
Eedle, Rev. Edward B rested, Bognor 
Egerton, Rev.T.Dunnington, Yorkshire 
Egerton, Rev. Thomas, York 

o * 

Elder, Rev. Edward, Balliol Coll. 

Eley, Rev. H. Aldham, Essex 

Ellerton, Rev. E. D.D. Magdalen Coll. 

fElliott, C. J. Esq. St. John s Coll. 

Ellis, Mr. Kitson 

Ellison, Rev. Noel T. Huntspill, Bridge- 
water 

Ellon Episcopal Chapel Library 

*EUon, Rev. Mr. G. N. B. 

Elmes, C. C. Esq. Bath 

*Elmhirst, Rev. Geo. Leeds 

Elrington, Rev. Dr. Regius Professor 
of Divinity, Dublin 

Emmanuel College Library, Cambridge 

Erskine, Hon. and Rev. H. D. Swith- 
land, Leicestershire 



Faber, Rev. F. W. University Coll. 
Falcon, Rev. Wm. St. John s Coll. 

Cambridge 

Falconer, Rev. Dr. Bath 
Fallow, Rev. T. M. 
Farebrother, Rev. T. Brompton, Market 

Harboro 

Farley, Rev. T. Magdalen Coll. 
Farrer, James William, Esq. 
Fawcett, Rev. Jas. Leeds 
Fawkes, Mrs. Dulwich 
Fearon, Rev. D. R. 
Fenwick, Rev. M. J. Donegal 
Felix, Rev. Peter 

Fellowes, Rev. C. Shottesham, Norfolk 
Few, Robert, Esq. 
Fielding, Rev. H. Manchester 
Fisher, Rev. A. Bridport 
Fisher, Mrs. Jedden, Tunbridge Wells 
Fitzgerald, Esq. 

Fitzroy, Rev. August. Fakenham,Thetford 
Fletcher, Rev. C. Southwell 
Fletcher, Sir Henry, Bart. Ashley Park, 

Walton on Thames 

Floyer, Rev. T. B. Oldershaw, Lichfield 
Ford, Rev. J. Exeter 
Ford, Wm. Esq. 
Forster, Rev. H. B. 
*Forsyth, Dr. Aberdeen 
Fortescue, Rev. R. II. Revelstock, 

Devon 
Foskett,Rev. S. M. 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



Foulkes, Rev. H. B. Balliol Coll. 

Fowler, Rev. II. Liskeard, Cornwall 

Fox, Rev. Charles, Bridport 

Fox, Mr. 

Fraser, Rev. Robert, Lyminge, Hylhe 

Freeman, Rev. II. Peterboro 

Fioude, Ven. R. H. Archdeacon of 

Totness 

*Froude, Win. Esq.jBristol 
Fulford, Rev. F. Trowbridge, Wilts 
*Furlong, Rev. C. J. Warfield, Berks 
Fursdon,Mrs. FursdonHouse,near Exeter 



*Gace, Rev.FrederickAubert,Magdalen 

Hall 

*Garden, Rev. Francis 
Garratt, John, Esq. Bishops Court, 

near Exeter 

Gathercole, Rev. M. A. North Brixton 
*Gaunt, Rev. C. Jofield, near Uckfield 
Gaye, Rev. C. H. 
*Gayfere, Rev. Thomas, Bradford 
Gawthern, Rev. Francis Seeker, Exeter 

Coll. 
George, Henry, Bookseller, Westerham, 

Kent 

Gibson, Rev. W. Chester 
Gillet, Rev. G. E. 
Gladstone, Rev. Mr. Liverpool 
Gladstone, John, Esq. Fasque, Fetter- 

cairne, Kincardineshire 
Gladstone, William Ewart, Esq. M.P. 

Ch. Ch. 2 copies 
Gladwin, Rev. C. Liverpool 
Glanville, Rev. Edward F. Wheatfield 

Rectory, Tetsworth 
*Glencross, J. Esq. Balliol College 
*Glenie, J. M. Esq. St. Mary Hall 
Glossop, Rev. Hen. Vicar of Isleworth 
Glover, Rev. F. A. Dover 
Glover, Rev. R. A. Dover 
Glyn, Rev. H. G. 

Godfrey, Rev. W. Tibberton, Worcester 
Goldsmid, Nathaniel, Esq. M. A. Exeter 

Coll. 
Goldsmith, II. Esq. St. Peter s Coll. 

Cambridge 



Gomm, Major-General Sir William 
*Goodlake, Rev. T. W. 6 windon House, 

near Cheltenham 

Goodwin, H. Esq. Caius Coll. Cambridge 
Gordon, Osborne, Esq. Ch. Ch. 
Gordon, C. S. Esq. Exeter 
Gordon, W. Esq. Exeter 
Gough, Rev. H. Twyford 
*Goulburn, H. Esq. 
Gould, Rev. R. J. Eton College 
Gower, Rev. John, Ashperton 
Graham, Rev. W. H. 
Graham, Mr. Bookseller, Oxford 
Grantham Clerical Library 
*Grant, Rev. A. Chelmsford 
Grant, Rev. James B. Dublin 
Graves, Rev. John, Ashperton 
Greene, R. Esq. Litchfield 
Green, Rev. H. Cople, Bedfordshire 
Green, Rev. M. J. Lincoln Coll. 
Green, R. Esq. 
Gregory, Rev. L. Exeter 
Gresley, Rev. Sir Nigel, Bart. 
Gresley, Rev. W. Litchfield 
*Gresley, J. M. Esq. Exeter Coll. 
Greswell, Rev. R. Worcester Coll. 
Gretton, Rev. R. H. Nantwich, Cheshire 
Grey, Hon. and Rev. Francis 
Grierson, J. Esq. 
*Grieve, Rev. Mr. Ellon 
Griffiths, Rev.T. Wadham Coll. 
Grimstead, Rev. G. 
Groves, Mr. Chas. 

Grub, George, Esq. Advocate, Aberdeen 
*Guillemard, Rev. J. St. John s Coll. 
*Guillemard, Rev. H. P. Trinity Coll. 
Gunner, Rev. W. Winchester 
*Gutch, Rev. R. Segrave, Leicestershire 



*Haines, W. C. Esq. Hampstead 
Haines, Mr. Bookseller, Oxford 
Halcombe, John, Esq. 
Hale, Rev. G. C. Hillingdon 
*Hale, Rev. W. H. Charter House 
Hale, Rev. Matthew, Alderley, Glou 
cestershire 

*Hall, Rev. J. C. Great Cressingham, 
Norfolk 



8 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



Hall, Rev. W. J. 

*Hallens,Rev. G. Rushbrooke Medeout, 
Upper Canada 

* Hamilton, Rev. Jas. Great Baddow 
*Hamilton, Rev. Walter Ker, Merton 

Coll. Chaplain to the Bp. of Salisbury 
Hamilton, Mr. John, Southampton 
tHannah, J. Esq. C.C. C. 
Hannaford, Mr. Bookseller, Exeter 
*Harding, Rev. I. St. Ann s, Blackfriars 
Harington, Rev. E. C. Exeter 
Harington, Rev. Rich. Guide, North 
ampton 

* Harness, Rev. Wm. 
Harrington, Rev. E. Exeter 

Harris, Hon. and Rev.W. L. T. All Souls 
Harrison, Benj. Esq.Clapham Common 
*Harrison, Rev. B. Ch. Ch. Domestic 

Chaplain to the Abp. of Canterbury 
Harrison, Rev. H. Goudhurst, Kent 
Harrison, Rev. J. W. Fillingham Castle, 

Lincolnshire 
Harrison, W. Esq. 
Harvey, Rev. Mr. Bath 
Hasting, Rev. J. Arclay Kings, Worces 
tershire 

Hawker, Rev. R. S. Moorwinston, Corn 
wall 

*Hawkins,Rev.Edward, Pembroke Coll. 
*Hawkins, Rev. E. Churcham, Glou 
cester 

Hawkins, Rev. Ernest, Exeter Coll. 
Hawkins, Rev. H. C. H. Lydney 
Hawks, Rev. W. Gateshead, Durham 
Hayden, Mrs. Thomas, Guildford 
Heathcote, Sir Wm. Bart.Hursley Park, 
near Winchester 

* Heathcote, Rev. C. J. Clapton 
Heathcote, Rev. George, Sawtry, Stilton, 

Hants 

* Heathcote, Rev. W. B. New Coll. 
Henderson, Rev. T. Messing, Kelvedon 
*Henderson, W. G. Esq. Magd. Coll. 
*Hessey, Rev. J. A. St. John s Coll. 
Hewett, Rev. P.Binstead, Isle of Wight 
Hewitt, Hon. John J. Balliol Coll. 
Heycock, Rev. Owston, Leicestershire 
*Hibbert, Miss E. S. 

Higgs, Rev. R. W. King s Coll. 
*Hill, Rev, E. Ch. Ch. 



Hindle, Rev. Joseph, Higham 

Hinde, Rev. Thos. 

Hingeston, James Ansley, Esq. 

Hippisley, J. H. Esq. 

Ilippisley, R. W. Esq. Exeter Coll, 

Hoare, W. H. Esq. Ashurst Park, Tun- 

bridge Wells 

Hobhouse, Edmund, Esq. Balliol 
Hocking, Richard, Esq. Penzance 
Hodgson, Rev. Chas. Bodmin 
Hodgson, Rev. J.Geo. St.Peter s, Thanet 
Hodgson, Rev. John, St. Peter s, Thanet 
*Hodgson, Rev. J. F. Croydon 
Hodgson, Rev. John, Hartburn 
* Hodgson, Rev. H. Wanstead, Essex 
Hodgson, W. Esq. Wanstead 
Hodson, Rev. Mr. Salisbury 
Hodson, J. S. Esq. Merton Coll. 
Hogan, Rev. J. Tetbury, Gloucestershire 
Holden, Rev. Geo. Liverpool 
*Holden, Rev. W. R. Worcester 
Holder, the Misses, Torquay 
Holdsworth, Miss M. Dartmouth 
*Hole,Rev.Geo. Chumleigh, near Exeter 
Hollis, Rev. G. P. Duddington, Somerset 
Holthouse, Rev. C. S. 
Hope, A. B. Esq. Trinity Coll. Cam 
bridge 

Hook, Rev. Dr. W. F. Leeds 
Hope, James R. Esq. Merton Coll. 
*Horncastle Clerical Society 
Hornby, Rev. James, Winwick, War- 

ringlon 
Hornby, Rev. Wm. St. Michael s Gar- 

stang, Lancashire 
*Horsfall, Rev. A. Grange, Derby 
Horsfall, J. Esq. Standard Hill, Notts 
Horter, Rev. George 
*Hoskins, Rev. W. E. Canterbury 
Hotham, Rev. C. Patrington, Hull 
Hotham, Rev. J. G. Sutton-at-home, 

Dartford 

Hotham, W. F. Esq. Ch. Ch. 
IJoughton, Rev. J. Matching 
Houghton, Rev. W. Sutton, Cheshire 
Howard, Rev. W. Great Witchingham, 

Norfolk 

Howard, Hon. C. 

*lloward, Hon. and Rev. Wm. Fareham 
Howell, Rev. Alexander, Southampton 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



9 



Hovvell, Rev. II. Merton Coll. 

Howell, Rev. A. Sedgley 

Hubbard, Rev. Thos. Leytonstone 

Huddleston, Rev. G. J. 

Hudson and Co. Booksellers, Kendal 

*Hughes, Rev. II. 

Hulton, Rev. Campbell Grey, Man 
chester 

Hulton, Rev. W. 

Hunt, R. S. Esq. Exeter Coll. 

Hunter, Rev. W. St. John s Coll. 

Hutchins, Rev. W. Bath 

Hutchinson, Rev. Cyril, Hawkhurst, 
Kent 

Hutchinson, Rev. James, Chelmsford 

Hutton, Rev. H. Filleigh, Devon 

Hutton, Rev. W. Helsington, Kendal 

Huxtable, Rev. A. 



Johnson, Mr. Bookseller, Cambridge 

*Jones, Yen. II. C. Archdeacon of Essex 

Jones, Rev. D. Stamford 

Jones, Rev. E. Wigan 

Jones, Rev. Edward 

Jones, Rev. H. J. Edinburgh 

Jones, Rev. H. Llanfaes, Beaumaris 

Jones, Rev. H. 

*Jones, Rev. II. J. Newcastle-on-Tyne 

Jones, William, Esq. M.A. Ball. Coll. 

Jones, Mr. James, Manchester 

*Irons, Rev. W. J. Barkway, Herts 

*Irvine, Rev. A. Leicester 

Irvine, Rev. Mr. Bristol 

Irving, Rev. J. Kendal 

Isham, Rev. A. All Souls Coll. 



Jackson, Rev. F. G. Brighstone, Isle of 
Wight 

fJackson, Rev. J. Islington 

Jackson, Rev. Dr. Lowther, nr. Penrith 

tJacobson, Rev. W. Magd. Hall 

J affray, Mr. Jas. Bookseller, Berwick 

James, Re v.J.Ilawmarsh, near Rotheram 

James, Rev. Henry 

James, Rev. E. Prebendary of Win 
chester 

Jeffreys, Rev. Henry Anthony, Ch. Ch. 

Jelf,Rev. Richard William, D.D. Canon 
of Ch. Ch. 

Jelf, Rev. W. E. Ch. Ch. 

Jennings, Rev. J. Preb. of Westminster 

Jeremie, Rev. F. J. Guernsey 

Jeremie, Rev. T. T. Trinity College, 
Cambridge 

Illingworth, Rev. E. A. 

Inglis, Sir R. H. Bart. M.P. 

Ingram, Rev. Geo. Chedburgh, Suffolk 

*Ingram, Rev. R. 

Inman, Rev. W. J. 

Johnson, Miss 

Johnson, Rev. E. M. Brooklands, Long 
Island, U. S. 

Johnson, Rev. J. Outwell 

Johnson, Manuel John, Esq. Magd. Hall 



Karslake, Rev. W. H. Meshaw, South 

Molton, Devon 

*Kebbel, G. C. D. Esq. University Coll 
Keble, Miss 

Keble, Rev. T. Bisley, Gloucestershire 
Keigwin, Rev. James P. Gwennap, 

Cornwall 

Kekewich, S. T. Esq. 
Kempe, Rev. G. Machard, near Crediton 
Kenney, F. Esq. 
Kenrick, Rev. J. Horsham 
*Kent, Rev. G. D. Sudbrooke, near 

Lincoln 
Kenyon, Lord 

Kerr, Hon. and Rev. Lord, Dittisham 
Kerr, Lord Henry, Dittisham 
Kerrier Clerical Club, Cornwall 
Kershaw, Rev. G. W. Worcester 
Kidd, Dr. Oxford 
Kindersley, R. T. Esq. 
King, Rev. Archdeacon 
King, R. J. Esq. Exeter Coll. 
King, R. P. Esq. Bristol 
Kitson, E. P. Esq. Balliol Coll. 
Kitson, John F. Esq. Exeter Coll. 
Knatchbull, Rev . U.K. Klham.Nbrfo 
Knight, Rev. D. Northampton 
Knight, W. Esq. Worcester Coll. 
Knollys, Mr. 



10 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



Knox, Rev. H. B. Monk s Eleih. 

O 

Hadleigh 

Kynnersley, E. S. Esq. Trinity Coll. 
Kyle, Rev. M. Cork 



Lace, F. John Esq. Ingthorpe Grange, 
Yorkshire 

Lade, John Wm. Esq. 

*Laing, Rev. David 

Lake, Rev. Balliol Coll. 

*Lampen, Rev. R. Probus, Cornwall 

*Landor, Rev. R. E. Birlingham 

Lane, Mrs. F. 

Lane, Rev. C. Deal 

Lane, Rev. C. Kennington 

Langbridge, Mr. Bookseller, Birming 
ham 

Langdon, Augustus, Esq. 

Langmore, W. Esq. M.D. 

*Laprimaudaye, Rev. C. J. Leyton 

Latimer, Rev. VV. B. Tynemouth 

Law, Rev. S. T. Chancellor of the 
Diocese of Litchfield 

Law, Rev. W. T. Whitchurch, Char- 
mouth, Devon 

Lawrence.Rev. Alfred, Sandhurst, Kent 

Lawrence, Rev. Charles 

Lawson, Rev. VV. Delancey, Oak ham 

Lee, Mr. Sidmouth 

*Leeds Clergy Society 

tLeefe, Rev. Audley End, Essex 

Lefroy, Rev. A. C. 

*Legge, Rev. Henry, East Lavant, near 
Chichester 

Legge, Rev. W. Ashtead 

*Leighton, Rev. F. K. All Souls Coll. 

Le Mesurier, John, Esq. Ch. Ch. 

*Leslie, Rev. Charles 

Leslie, Mr. Bookseller, Great Queen 
Street, London 

Lewis, Rev. David, Roehampton 

Lewis, Rev. R. Farway, near Honiton 

Lewis, Rev T. T. Aymestry, near 
Leominster 

Ley, Rev. Jacob S. A&hprington, Devon 

Ley, W. H. Esq. Trinity Coll. 

Liddell, Rev. Henry G. Ch. Ch. 



Lifford, Right Hon. Lord Viscount, 
Astley Castle, near Coventry 

Light and Ridler, Bristol 

Lindsell, J. Esq. St. Peter s Coll. Cam 
bridge 

*Lingard, Rev. Joshua, Curate of the 
Chapelry of Hulme, near Manchester 

Linzee, Rev. E. H. 

Liveing, Rev. HenryThomas, Nayland, 
Suffolk 

Lloyd, Rev. C. W. 

Lockwood, Rev. John, Rector of King- 
ham, Oxon 

Lockwood, Rev. Mr. Coventry 

Lodge, Rev. B. Chigwell, Essex 

Lomax, T. G. Esq. Litchfield 

Lott, Mr. 

Lowe, John Wm. Esq. 

Lowe, T. Esq. Oriel Coll. 

Lowe, Rev. R. Misterton, Somerset 

Lowe, Rev. T. H. Precentor of Exeter 

Lowe, Rev. R. F. Madeira 

Lowe, Mr. Bookseller, Wimborne 

Lawrie, A. J. C. Esq. 

Lumsden, Rev. H. 

Lund, Mr. St. John s Coll. Cambridge 

Lundie, Rev. W. Compton, Berwick-on- 
Tweed 

*Lush, Mr. Vicesimus, Corpus Christt 
College, Cambridge 

Lusk, John, Esq. Glasgow 

Lutener, Rev. T. B. Shrewsbury 

Luxmore, Rev. J. H. M. 

Lyall, Rev. Alfred 

Lyall, Ven. W. R. Archdeacon of 
Colchester 

Lysons, Rer. Samuel, Hempstead, Glou. 
cestershire 



M call, Rev. E. Winchester 
Maclean, Rev. H. Coventry 
Maclean, Rev. J. Sheffield 
Macfarlane, Rev. J. D.Frant.Tunbridge 

Wells 
Mackinson, Rev.T.C. Colonial Chaplain, 

New South Wales 
*Macmullen, R. G. Esq. C.C.C. 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



11 



Macpherson, Rev. A. Rothwell, near 

Kcttering 

]\Iadox, Wm. Esq. 
Magdalene College Library 
M Arthy, Rev. F. Loders, Dorset 
M lver, Rev. Wm. West Derby 
Maitland, Rev. S. R. 
Maitland, Rev. P. Blackburn, Lanca 
shire 

M Laren, Major, Portobello, Greenock 
*: Mai lock, Rev. Wm. Torquay 
Mallory, Rev. G. 

Manning, Rev. Hen. Lavington, Sussex 
Mann,W.Moxon,Esq.ClareHall,Camb. 
Manning, Mrs. Tillington, Sussex 
Mansell, Wm. Esq. 

Markland, J. H. Esq. Temple, London 
Markland, Thomas, Esq. Manchester 
Marriott, Rev. J. Bradfield, Reading 
*Marriott, Rev. C. Oriel Coll. 2 copies 
Marriott, Rev. F. A. Oriel Coll. 
Marsden, Rev. A. Gargrave 

Marshall, Rev. Edward Ruskington, 

Sleaford, Lincoln 
Marshall, Edward, Esq. C.C.C. 

Marsham, Rev. G. F. J. Allington, 
Maidstone 

Martin, Rev. Chancellor, Exeter 

Martin, Rev. Richard, Menheniot 

Martyn, Rev. J. Exeter 

Mason, Rev. W. Normanton 

Massingberd, Rev. F. C. 

Masters, Rev. J. S. Greenwich 

Matheson, G. F. Esq. 

Maxwell, Henry C. Esq. York 

May, Rev. George, Herne, Kent 

Maynard, Rev. J. Berkeley, Gloucester 
shire 

Mayow, Rev. M. W. Magdalen Hall 

Meade, Rev. J. Stratford on Avon 

Medley, Rev. J. Exeter 

*Medwyn, Hon. Lord 

M-ndham, Rev. J. Clophill, Beds. 

Menzies, F. Esq. Brasenose Coll. 

Mercwether, Rev. Francis, Whitwick, 
Leicestershire 

*Metcalfe, Rev. W. Tam worth 

M Glashen, Mr. James, Dublin 

Mill, Rev. Dr. 

Miller, Rev. C. Magdalen Coll. 



Miller, Rev. John, Worcester Coll. 
Benefield, Northamptonshire 

Millner, Rev. W. Bristol 

Mills, I. J. Esq. Lexden Park 

Milward, Henry Esq. B.A. Clifton 

Minster, Rev. T. Libston, near Leeds 

Moberly, Rev. Dr. Winchester 

Monro, Rev. Edward, Oriel Coll. 

Moody, Rev. Henry R.Chartham, near 
Canterbury 

Moore, Rev. Arthur, Stratton, Glou 
cestershire 

Moorsom, Captain, Knightsbridge 

Mordaunt, Dowager Lady, Avenhurst, 
Stratford on Avon 

Mordaunt, Sir John, Bart. 

Morgan, Rev. J. P. C. Llangwyryfor 

Morgan, Rev. J. 

Morice, J. Esq. Honiton 

Morrell, Baker, Esq. St. Giles. Oxford 

Morrell, F. Esq. St. Giles, Oxford 

Morrell, Rev. G. K. St. John s 

Morrison, Mr. Liverpool 

Morris, Rev. T. E. Ch. Ch. 

Mosse, Rev. Sam. T. Ashbourn, Derby 
shire 

Mozley, Rev. C. Thomas, Cholderton 

Mozley, H. Esq. Derby 

Mules, Rev. P. Exeter Coll. 

Munby, Joseph, Esq. York 

Munro, Wm. Esq. M.D. Inverness 

Murray, F. H. Esq. Ch. Ch. 

Murray, G. E. Esq. Ch. Ch. 

Musket, Robert, Esq. 

Muskett, Mr. C. Bookseller, Norwich 



Neave, Rev. H. L. Epping 

Needham, Hon. Mr. Trinity Coll . 

Cambridge 

Nevile, Charles, Esq. Trinity Coll. 
*i\ew, Rev. F. T. Shepton Mallet 
New-all, Rev. S. Dedsbury 
Newcastle-on-Tyne Clerical Society 
Newman, W.J. Esq. OrielColl.2 copies 
Nicholl, Rev. J. R. Greenhill, near 

Barnett 
Nicholls, Rev. W. L. Bath 



12 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



Nicholson, Rev. Wm. 

Nicholson, Miss F. Rochester 

Nind, Rev. W. Fellow of St. Peter s, 

Cambridge 

Northcote, G. B. Esq. Exeter Coll. 
*Northcote, J. S. Esq. C.C.C. 
Nunn, Rev. Thomas, Birmingham 
Nutcombe,Rev.Mr. Oxenham,Medbury, 

Devon 
Nutt, Rev. Charles, Magdalen College 



Oakeley.Rev.SirHerbert, Bart.Bocking 
"Oakeley, Rev. Frederick, Balliol Coll. 
O Brien, S. August. Esq. Blatherwycke 

Park, Wansford 
O Brien, Rev. II. Dublin 
O Bryen, Rev. Hewitt, Heywood, Lan 

cashire 

*Oldknow, Rev. J. Uppingham 
Ogilvie, Rev. C. A. Balliol Coll. 
Ogle, J. A. M.D. Clinical Professor 

of Medicine, Oxford 
Ogle, Maurice, Esq. Glasgow 
tOldham, Joseph, Esq. Hatherleigh, 

Devon 

Ormandey and Son, Liverpool 
fOrmerod, Rev. Thomas J. Bras. Coll. 
Osborne, J. Esq. 
Oswald, Alexander, Esq. 
Oswell, Rev. Lloyd 
Ouvry, Rev. P. T. 
Owen, Rev. E. Wendover 



Page, Rev. Dr. Gillingham, Kent 
Page, Rev. Cyril 

Paget, Rev. F. Elford, Litchfield, Chap 
lain to the Bishop of Oxford 
Palk, Rev. W. Exeter Coll. 
Palk, Rev. Wm. Ashcombe 
Palmer, Rev. J. 

Palmer, Rev. W. Worcester Coll. 
Palmer, Rev. W. Magd. Coll. 
Palmer, R. Esq. 
Papillon, Rev. John 
Pardoe, Rev. J. 



Parker, Rev. Charles 

tParker, Rev. W. Appleton-le-Street 

tParkes, Rev. W. 

Parkinson, Rev. R. Manchester 

Parlby, Rev. Hall 

*Parsons, Rev. G. L. Benson 

*Patteson, Hon. Mr. Justice 

tPattison, Mark, Esq. Oriel 

Paul, Rev. Charles, Bath 

Peake, Rev. G. E. Taunton 

tPearse, T. Esq. Magdalen Coll. 

Pearson, the Very Rev. Hugh N. D.D. 
Dean of Salisbury 

Pearson, Rev. Charles, Knebworth, 
Stevenage, Kerts 

Pearson, Rev. II. W. Guildford 

Peck, J. Esq. Temple Combe 

*Pelly, Rev. Theophilus, C.C.C. 

*Penny, Rev. Edw. St. John s Coll. 

*Perceval, Hon. and Rev. A. P. 

*Perry, Mr. 

Peters, Rev. Henry, St. Jolmlee, 
Northumberland 

Petley, Henry, Esq. Wadham Coll. 

Phelps, Rev. H. D. Tarrington, Led- 
bury, Herefordshire 

Phillipps, S. M. Esq. 

Phillips,Rev.G. Queen s Coll. Cambridge 

Phillott, Johnson, Esq. Bath 

*Philpotts, Rev. W. J. Hallow, Wor 
cester 

Phippen, Robt. Esq. Badgworth Court, 
Somerset 

Phipps, Rev. E. J. Devizes 

*Pickwood, Rev. J. Stepney 

Pigott, Rev. J. R. flughenden 

Pinckard, Wm.Esq. Handley.Towcester 

Pitts, Rev. John, Street, near Glaston- 
bury 

Platt, Rev. George 

*Pocock, Rev. C. Rouselench, near 
Evesham 

*Pocock, N. Esq. M.A. Queen s Coll. 

Pocock, C. J. Esq. Bristol 

*Pocock, Rev. C. S. Inkberrpw, Wor 
cestershire 

Pole, Rev. R. Chandos, Radbourne, 
Derby 

*Pole, E. S. Chandos, Esq. Radbourne 
Hall, Derby 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



13 



Ponsonby, Hon. John 
*Ponsonby, Hon. Walter 
*Poole,Rev.J.Enmore,near Bridgewater 

fPooley, Rev. M. Scotter 
Porcher, Charles, Esq. 
Portal, Melville, Esq. Ch. Ch. 
Porter, Rev. Chas. Stamford 
Portman f Rev. F. B. All Souls 
Pountery, Rev. H. Wolverhampton 
Povah, Rev. J. V. 
Powell, Arthur, Esq. 
*Powell, Chas. Esq. Speldhurst 
Powell, Rev. H. T. Coventry 
Powell, Rev. T. Ampthill 
*Powell, J. C. Esq. 
*Powles, R. Cowley, Esq. Exeter Coll. 
Pownall, Rev C. C. B. Milton Ernest 
Pratt, Rev. Mr. Cruden, N. B. 
Pressley, Rev. Mr. Frasersburgh 
Preston, Rev. George Dean s Yard, 

Westminster 

Pretyman, Rev.John, Sherington, Bucks 
Prevost.Rev.Sii George,Bart. OrielColl. 
Prichard, J. C. Esq. Oriel Coll. 
Prickett, Rev. M.TrinityColl. Cambridge 
Pridden, Rev. W. North Ockenden, 

Essex 

Prideaux, Esq. 

Pruen, Rev. W. A. Snitterfield, Worcester 
Pryce, John, Esq. Delvidere, Sussex 



RadclifTe, Rev. J. F. Hucclescote 
Raikes, R. Esq. Exeter Coll. 
Ramsay, Rev. E. B. St. John s Chapel, 

Edinburgh 

Randall, Rev. II. G. Queen s Coll. 
Randolph, Rev. E. J. Eastry, Sandwich 
Randolph, Rev. G. 
Randolph, Rev. Herbert 
Randolph, Rev. S. Hadham 
Randolph, Rev. Thomas 
Ranken, Rev. Mr. Old Deer 
Rashdall, Rev. John, Exeter 
*Raven, V. Esq. Magd. Coll. Camb. 
Raw, Rev. Chas. Maidstone 
*Rawle, Mr. Trinity Coll. Cambridge 



Rawlins, Rev. C. Allerthorpe, Pork- 

lington 

Ray, Rev. Cecil, Liverpool 
Rayer, Rev. Wm. Tiverton 
Rayleigh, Right Hon. Lord, Terling 

Place, Essex 

Reece, Rev. James, Tinsley 
Reed, Rev. Christ. Tynemouth 
Reeves, Rev. F. J. H. 
Reid, C. B. Esq. Barkway, Royston 
*Relton, Rev. J. R. Tewkesbury 
Rennett, Rev. Mr. 

*Rice, H. Esq. Ifield, near Southampton 
*Richards, Rev. J. L. Rector of Exeter 

College 

Richards, Rev. E. T. Farlington 
Richards, Rev. George, Warrington 
Richards, Rev. Henry, Horfield, near 

Bristol 

Richards, Rev. Upton 
Richards, Rev. J. Stowlingtopft 
Richards, Rev. T. Watkyn, Puttenham 

Guildford, Surrey 

Richmond, Rev. C. G. Six Hills, Lin 
colnshire 

Ricketts, Rev. F. 

Ridings, Mr. George, Bookseller, Cork 
Risdale, Rev. E. Troubridge 
Riviere, Mr. Bookseller, Bath 
Roberts, Mr. Liverpool 
Robertson. J. Esq. Barton, Notts 
Robertson, J. Esq. D.C.L. Doctor s 

Commons 

Robertson, John, Esq. 
Robertson, Rev. J. C. Trinity Coll. 

Cambridge 

Robertson, Kev. J.C. Univ. Coll. Oxford 
*Robson, J. U. Esq. Magdalen Hall 
Rochester, Very Rev. the Dean of 
Mlodmell, Rev. John, Burford, Salop 
Rodd, Rev. C. North Hill 
Rodwell, Rev. Mr. Tenbury 
Rodwell, Mr. Bookseller, Bond Street 
Rogers, E. Esq. Ch. Ch. 
Rogers, Rev. John, Canon of Exeter 
Rogers, Rev. J. Foston, Leicestershire 
Rogers, Mrs. Percy s Cross, Fulham 
Rohde, Mrs. Eleanor, Croydon 
Rooper, Rev. Wm. Abbots Ripton 
Ross, Rev. J. L. Oriel Coll. 



14 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



Round, Rev. James F. Colchester 

Routh, Rev. Martin Joseph, D.D. Presi 
dent of Magdalen Coll. 

Rowley, Rev. T. Ch. Ch. 

Rump, James, Esq. Swanton Morley &gt; 
Norfolk 

Russell, J. Watts, Esq. 11am Hall 

tRussell, Mr. Bookseller, Aberdeen 

Russell, Rev. J. F. St. Peter s Church, 
Wai worth 

Russell, Rev. Samuel Henry 

Ryder, Rev. G. I). K;iston 

*Ryder, T. 1&gt;. Esq. Oriel 



Salter, Rev. John, Iron Acton, Bristol 

Sanders, Rev. Mr. 

*Sandford, Rev. G.B. Prestvvich 

Sandilands, Hon. and Rev. J. 

Sandilands, Rev. R. S. B. 

Savage, Mrs. Henleaze, near Bristol 

Schneider, Rev. H. 

*Scott, Rev. R. Balliol Coll. 

Scott, Rev. W. 

Seaton, Rev. Mr. Cleckheaton 

Selwyn, Rev. Wm. Ely 

Sewell, Rev. J. E. New Coll. 

Seymour, Rev. Sir J. H. Bart. North- 
church, Herts 

Seymour, Rev. Robert Kinwarton, 
Alcester 

Shadwell, Rev. J. E. Southampton 

Sharp, Rev. John, Horbury 

Sharp, Rev. W. Addington, Cumberland 

Sharpies, Rev. T. Blackburn 

Shaw, Rev. E. B. Narborough, Leices 
tershire 

Shearly, W. J. Esq. St. Peter s Coll. 
Cambridge 

Shedden, S. Esq. Pembroke College 

Shepherd, Rev. Samuel 

tSheppard, W. Esq. Oriel Coll. 

*Sherlock,Rev.H.II.Ashton,in Win wick 

Shilleto, W. Esq. Univ. Coll. 

*Shillibeer, Rev. John, Oundle 

*Short, Rev. Thomas V. D.D. Ch. Ch. 
Rector of St. George s, Bloomsbury 

Short, Rev. T. Trinity Coll. 



*Sibthorpe, Rev. W. Magd. Coll. 
Sidebottom, Rev. W. Buckden 
Sirams, George, Bookseller, Manchester 
Simpson, Rev. Joseph, Whitchurch, 

Salop 

Simpson, Rev. J. Pemberton, Wakefield 
Simpson, Rev. T. W. Thurnscowe Hall 
Sinclair, Rev. John, Edinburgh 
Skelton, Henry, jun. Esq. 
Skene, W. F. Esq. Edinburgh 
Skipsey, Rev. Mr. 

Skrine, Harcourt, Esq. Wadham Coll. 
Small, Rev. N. P. Market Bosworth 
Smart, Thomas, Esq. 
Smart, N. P. Market Bosworth 
Smirke, Sir Robert 
tSmith, Rev. Dr. Leamington 
Smith, Rev. Jeremiah, Long Buckby, 

Northampton 
Smith, Rev. E. II. Jersey 
Smith, Rev. Edward O. Hulcote, near 

Woburn 
Smith, Rev. H. R.Somers, Little Bentley, 

Essex 

*Smith, Rev. John, Bradford 
* Smith, Rev. Bernard, Magdalen 
Smith, Rev. Edward, Bocking 
*Smith, Rev. S. St. Mary s, Ely 
Smith, Henry, Esq. 
Smith, Rev. Joseph, Trinity Coll. 
Smith, Rev. P. P. Washford Pyne 
Smyth, Rev. Mr. Fifield, near Andover 
Soltau, Mr. 

Southby, Rev. Dr. Bulford, Amesbury 
*Sotheby, Rev. T. H. 
Southouse, Rev. George, Oriel Coll. 
*Southwell, Rev. Geo. Bristol 
Sparkes, Rev.Chas. liarningham, Suffolk 
*Spencer, Rev. W. J. Slarsten, Norfolk 
Spreat, Mr. Bookseller, Exeter 
*Spranger, Rev. R. J. Exeter Coll. 
Spry, Rev. John Hume, D.D. Oriel 

Coll. Rector of St. Mary-le-bone 
*Stackhouse s Library, the Trustees of 
Stacy, Rev. Thomas, Cardiff 
*Stafford, Rev. J. C. Magdalen Coll. 
Stanfield, Mr. J. Bookseller, Wakefield 
Stanley, Rev. E. Rugby 
Staveley, J. Bookseller, Nottingham 
Stead, Rev. A. Metfield, Suffolk 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



Stephens, Ferdinand, Esq. Exeter Coll. 

Stevens, Rev. Henry, Bradfield, Berks 

Stevens, Rev. M. F. T. Thornbury 

*Stevenson, Mr. T. Bookseller, Camb. 

Stewart, Mrs. Col. Balh 

Stewart, Mr. Pembroke Coll. Cambridge 

*Stonard, Rev. Dr. L lverstone 

Stonhouse, Rev. VV. B. Fery 

*Storer, Rev. John, Hawksworth, Notts 

Story, A. B. Esq. St. Alban s 

Storks, T. F. Esq. Jesus College, Camb. 

Straker, Mr. Bookseller, West Strand, 
London 

Street, Rev. A. VV. Pembroke Coll. 

Strong, Mr. W. Bookseller, Bristol 

Sturrock, Rev. W. Calcutta 

Sutherland, Dr. A. J. Ch. Ch. 

Swainson, Rev. C. L. Crick, Northamp 
tonshire 

Swainson, Rev. Mr. Clunn, Salop 

*Swete, Rev. B. Cork 

Swete, Rev. Wm. Downgate, Sandhurst 

fSymons, Rev. B. P. D.D. Warden of 
Wadham Coll. 

*Syms, Rev. Wm. Wadham Coll. 



Tait, Rev. A. C. Balliol Coll. 
Talbot, Hon. and Rev. W. C. Ingestrie, 

Litchfield 

fTalboys and Co. Booksellers, Oxford 
Tarbutt, Rev. Arthur, Dover 
Tatham, Rev. Arthur 
Taylor, Rev. M. J. Harold, Bedfordshire 
Taylor, Rev. Joseph, Upwell, Wisbeach 
Taylor, Rev. Robert, Leeds 
Taylor and Walton, Booksellers 
Taylor, Mr. Jas. Bookseller, Brighton 
*Tennant, Rev. Wm. 
*Terry, Michael, Esq. Queen s Coll. 
*Thomas, Rev. R. Hammersmith 
"Thompson, Rev. Sir H. Bart. Fareham 
Thompson, Rev. W. D. Tiinity College, 

Cambridge 
Thompson, Rev. W. H. Trinity Coll. 

Cambridge 
Thompson, Mr. G. Bookseller, Bury St. 

Edmunds 
Thomson, Rev. George, Andover 



Thornton, Rev. C. Margaret Chapel, 

London 

Thornton, H. S. Esq. Battersea Rise 
Thornton, Rev. Wm. Dodford,Weedon, 

Northampton 
Thornton, Rev. W. J. Llaiuvarne, 

Hereford 

Thornton, Rev. Spencer, Winslow, Bucks 
Thorold, Mr. W. Barnstaple 
Thwaytes, Rev. J. Carlisle 
tTJckell, G. Esq. University Coll. 
Tidswell, Rich. Esq. Upper Clapton 
Tindal, J. Esq. Huddersfield 
*Todd,Rev.J. H. TrinityCollege, Dublin 
Tomkins, Rev. John, Greenford 
Tomlinson s Library 
Townsend, Rev. G. F. Northallerton 
Tripp, Rev. Dr. Sampford Brett, 

Somerset 

Trollope, Rev. Arthur 
Trotman, Rev. J. F. 
Trowers, Rev. Walter 
*Truro Clerical Society 
Tucker, Rev. M. jun. 
Tufnell, Rev. G. Wormingford, near 

Colchester 

Turbitt, Rev. W. Halford 
Turner, Rev. J. F. Kidderminster 
Turner, Rev. J. Stourbridge 
Turner, Rev. J. F. Exeter 
Turner, Sharon, Esq. 
Turner, Rev. Thomas, Exeter Coll. 
Turner, Miss E. 
Turner, Rev. W. H. Norwich 
Twopenny, Rev. R. Little Casterton, 

Stamford 

Twopeay, Rev. D. S. Sittingbourne 
*Tyler, Rev. James Endell, Rector of 

St. Giles in the Fields 
Tyrrell, Rev. W.Cippenham, near Eton 
Tytler, Patrick Fraser, Esq. 



Underbill, Mr.E. B. Oxford 
Upton,Rev.J.S. Wentworth, Rotherham 
tUtterton, Rev. J. S. Oriel Coll. 



B2 



1C 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



*Vaux, Rev. Wm. Preb. of Winchester 

Vernon-Harcourt, Rev. L. 

Vickers, Yen. Archdeacon, Chetton, 

Bridgenorth 
Vigne, F. Esq. 
Vincent, General 

* Vincent, O. P. Esq. 

* Vizard, John, Esq. 
Vogan, Rev. T. S. L. 



*Wackerbarth, Rev. F. D Peldon 
Wainwright, Rev. Dr. Boston, U. S. A. 
Walker, Mrs. Tunbridge Wells 
Walker, Rev. G. A. Newcastle-on-Tyne 
Walker, Rev. R. Wadharo Coll. 
Walker, Rev. S. W. Bampton, Devon 
Walker, Rev. T. Beckleigh, Plymouth 
Walker, Mr. Queen s Coll. Cambridge 
W r alker, Rev. Thos. Christ s Coll. Camb 
Walkey, Rev. C. C. Head Master of 

Lucton School, Herefordshire 
Wall, Rev. Henry, Vice-Principal of 

St. Alban Hall 

Wallace, Rev. Geo. Canterbury 
Wallas, John, Esq. Queen s Coll. 
Walliuger, Rev. W. 
Walter, J. Esq. Exeter Coll. 
Walter, Rev. Edw. Langton Rectory 

Horncastle 

Walter, Rev. Ernest, Tachbrook 
Walter, Rev. Keats 

* Walton, Rev. Dr. Birdhook 
Ward, Right Hon. Lady 

*Ward, Rev.W. P. Compton Vallance, 

Dorchester 

Ward, Rev. Richard, Leeds 
Ward, Rev. W. G.Balliol Coll. 
Wardroper, Rev. Charles Christ Coll. 

Cambridge 
Ware Rural Deanery Book Club 

* Warter, Rev. J. Wood, West Tarring, 
Wason, James, Esq. Stroud 

Sussex 
W r atkins, Rev. Fred. Emmanuel Coll. 

Cambridge 
Watkins, Rev. W. Chichester 



Watkins, Rev. Henry, South Mailing, 
Lewes 

Watson, Joshua, Esq. 

Watson, Rev. J. D. Guilsborougb 

Northampton 

Watson, Rev. Alex. Manchester 
Watson, Rev. Geo. Eltheiley, Durham 
Watts, Rev. John, Tarrant Gunville, 

Blandford 
Watts, Richard, Esq. Clifton House, 

Workington 
Watts, Rev. William 
*Wayett, Rev. W. Pinchbeck 
*Weare, Rev. T. W. Ch. Ch. 
Webb, J. W. Esq. Clare Hall, Camb. 

* Webster, Rev. William, Christ s Hospital 
t Webster, Rev. Mr. Drumlithie 
*Weguelin, Rev. W. Stoke, nr. Arundel 

* Wells, Rev. Mr. Lambeth Palace 
West, Hon. R. W. Balliol Coll. 
Westmacott, Rev. H. Chastleton 
Whalley, Rev. D. C. 
Whatman, W. G. Esq. Ch. Ch. 
Wheeler, Mr. Bookseller, Oxford 
White, Rev. R. M. Magdalen Coll. 
White, Rev. James, Manchester 
White, Rev. W. S. 

White, Rev. R. M. Aveley, Essex 
White, R. Esq. Idle, near Bradford 
White, Mr. Bookseller, Piccadilly, 

London 

Whitford, Rev. R. W. 
*Whitfield, Rev. G. T. Bockleton 
Whitley, Mr. Manchester 
*\Vtckham, Rev. R. Twyford 
Wight, Isle of, Clerical Library 
*\Vilberforce, Rev.H. Bransgore, Hants. 
Wilberforce, Rev. R. J. East Farleigh 
Wilberforce, Rev. Samuel, Brightstone, 

Isle of Wight 
Wilde, Rev. S.D. Fletching, near Uck- 

field 

*Wilkinson, Rev. J. Merton College 
Williams, E T. Esq. Exeter Coll. 
*Williams,Rev.G.King sColl.Cambridge 
*Williams, Matthew D. Esq. 
Williams, Rev. I. Trinity Coll. 
Williams, Rev. F. V. 
Williams, Rev. J. West Hackney 
Williamson, Rev. R. H. Gateshead 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



17 



Williams, Robert, Esq. M.P. 

Willis, Rev. A. Ludlow 

Willis, H. Esq. Catherine Hall, Cam 
bridge 

Wilson, Rev. John, Trinity Coll. 

* Wilson, Rev. R. F. Hursley, nr. Win 
chester 

Wilson, Thomas, Esq. 

Wilson, Charles T. Esq. Magd. Hall 

Wilson, Walter, Esq. Bath 

Winchester, The Dean and Chapter of 

Winchester, Very Rev. the Dean of 

Winchester, Rev. W. Ashelworth, 
Gloucester 

tWingfield, Rev. William 

Winterbottom, J. Esq. 

Wise, Rev. Henry, Offchurch 

Wither, Rev. W. Otterbourne, Hants 

Witts, Rev. Edw. F. Upper Slaughter, 
Gloucestershire 

Wix, Rev. E. Archdeacon of New 
foundland 

Wodehouse, Thos. Esq. Balliol Coll. 

Wood, Rev.JH. Chichester 

Wood, Rev. G. Newcastle 

Wood, Rev. J. R. St. James s Palace 

*Wood, S. F. Esq. 

Woods, Rev. P. Dublin 

Wood, Rev. R. 

Wood, Rev, Jas. Settrington, nr. Malton 

Woodgate, Rev. H. A. St. John s Coll. 

Woods, Rev. G. S. West Dean, Chi 
chester 

Woodward, Rev. J. H. Bristol 

Woodyer, Mrs. Guildford 

fWoolcombe, E. C. Esq. Oriel Coll. 

*Woolcombe, Rev. Henry, Ch. Ch. 

Woolcombe, Wm. W. Esq. Exeter Coll. 



tWoollcombe, G. Esq. Ch. Ch. 

t Wordsworth, Rev. Dr. Master of Trinity 
Coll. Cambridge 

tWordsworth, Rev. Chas. SecondMaster 
of Winchester School 

Wrangham, Rev. G. W. Thorpe- 
Bassett 

Wrench, Rev. Frederick, Stowting Rec 
tory, Ashford 

Wrench, Rev. H. O. 

Wright, John, Esq. Marples 

Wright, Rev. J. A. 

Wright, Rev. R. Bridgrull 

Wright, Rev. T. B. Wrangle Vicarage, 
near Boston 

Wright, H. P. St. Peter s Coll. Cam 
bridge 

Wyatt, Rev. W. Snenton, Notts. 

Wynter.Rev.Dr. President of St. John s 
Coll. 

Wynter, Rev. J. C. St. John s Coll. 



Yarde, G. B. Esq. 

Yard, Rev. J. Havant 

Yates, Rev. E. T. Aylsham, Norfolk 

Young, P. Esq. Exeter Coll. 

Young, R. G. Esq. Oriel Coll. 

Young, Rev. Walter, Lisbellaw 



Zillwood, Rev. 1. O. Compton, Win 
chester 



There seems to be ground foi thinking, that many, who wished to 
become Subscribers to the Original Texts, have not distinctly specified 
that wish. It is requested that these, or any other corrections, may be 
sent to the Publishers. 



This day is published, 

3 vols. 8vo ? 21. 2s. 

S. JOANNIS CHRYSOSTOMI 
HOMILTAE.IN MATTHAEUM. 

Textum ad fidem codicum MSS. castigavit, variis lectionibus et 

adnotatione critica instruxit 

FRIDERICUS FIELD, A.M. 

COLL. SS. TRIN. CANTAB. SOCIUS. 

CANTABRIGIAE, J. ET J. J. DEIGHTON ; OXONII, J. H. PARKER; 
LONDINI, J. O. ET F. RIVINGTON. 



Preparing for publication in four Volumes^ 8vo. 

A 

COMMENTARY ON THE FOUR GOSPELS, 

COLLECTED OUT OF THE 

WORKS OF THE FATHERS; 

THANSLATED FROM THE 

CATENA AUREA, or GOLDEN CHAIN 

OF 

THOMAS AQUINAS. 

Edited by E. B. PTJSEY, D.D. 
J. KEBLE, M.A. 
J. H. NEWMAN, B.D. 



Published by J. H. Parker, Oxford. 



5 vols. Bvo. 31. 
The THEOLOGICAL WORKS of 

EDWARD BURTON, D.D. 

LATE REGIUS PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY, 
AND CANON OF CHRIST CHURCH. 

Or separately, 

8vo. 2s. 6d. 

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR; AND TRACTS 

Second edition, 8vo. 3s. 

THE POWER OF THE KEYS, 

Or Considerations on the Absolving Power of the Church, and 
upon some of the Privileges of the Christian Covenant. 

8vo. 10s. 6d. 

SERMONS 

PREACHED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD. 

8vo. 3s. 6d. 
AN ATTEMPT TO ASCERTAIN 

THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, AND 

OF ST. PAUL S EPISTLES. 

Third edition, 2 vols. 8vo. ll. 2s. 6d. 
LECTURES 

UPON Till 

ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY of the FIRST THREE CENTURIES, 
From the Crucifixion of Jesus Christ to the year 313. 

8vo. 10s. Gd. 
AN INQUIRY 

INTO THE 

HERESIES OF THE APOSTOLIC AGE, 

In Eight Sermons 
AT HAMPTON S LECTURE. 

2 vols. 8vo. 19s. 
TESTIMONIES OF THE ANTE-NICENE FATHERS 

To the Divinity of Christ; to the Doctrine of the Trinity; and 

the Divinity of the Holy Ghost. 



Second Edition, 4 vols. 8vo. 21. 2s. 
PAROCHIAL SERMONS. 

BY J. H. NEWMAN, B.D. 
VICAR OF ST MARY S, OXFORD, AND FELLOW OF ORIEL COLLEGE. 



BY THE SAME AUTHOR, 

Second edition, 8vo. 10s. Gd. 

LECTURES ON THE PROPHETICAL OFFICE of the CHURCH, 

Viewed relatively to 
ROMANISM AND POPULAR PROTESTANTISM. 

Second edition, 8vo. 10s. 6d. 
LECTURES ON JUSTIFICATION. 

vols. 1 to 4. 8vo. ll. 8s. 6d. 

TRACTS FOR THE TIMES, 

By MEMBERS of the UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD. 

Any number or part may be had separately. 



Nos. 1,2, 3, and 4, Is. each, 
PLAIN SERMONS. 

By CONTRIBUTORS to the " TRACTS FOR THE TIMES. 



&gt; 



8vo. 10s. 6d. 

SERMONS 

Preached chiefly in the Royal Chapel at Whitehall. 
BY FREDERICK OAKELEY, M.A. 

FELLOW OF BALLIOL COLLEGE, PREBENDARY OF LICHFIELD, AND ONE 
OF THE PREACHERS AT WHITEHALL. 



12mo. 4s. 6d. 

SERMONS 

PREACHED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD. 
BY THE REV. SAMUEL WILBERFORCE, M.A. 

RECTOR OF BRIGHTSTONE, ISLE OF WIGHT. 



Second edition, 8vo, 3s. 

THE CHURCH the CONVERTER of the HEATHEN. 

TWO SERMONS 

Preached at MELCOMBE REGIS, in behalf of the Society for the Propagation of 

the Gospel. 

WITH NOTES. 
BY E. B. PUSEY, D.D. 

REGIUS PROFESSOR OF I1KBREW, CANON OF CII RIST CHURCH, 
LATE FELLOW OF ORIEL COLLEGE. 

These Sermons are also printed singly in a cheap form for distribution, 

price 2d. each or 15s. per hundred. 



BY THE SAME AUTHOR, 

Second Edition, with Three Appendices, 8vo. 4s. 
PATIENCE AND CONFIDENCE 

THE STRENGTH OF THE CHURCH. 

A Sermon preached on the Fifth of November, before the 

University of Oxford. 

The Three Appendices may be had separate, 2s. 



8vo. 6s. 

REMARKS ON THE PROSPECTIVE AND PAST BENEFITS 
OF CATHEDRAL INSTITUTIONS, 

In the Promotion of sound Religious Knowledge and of Clerical 

Education. 



Second edition, 8vo. 4s. 6d. 
A LETTER 

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD 

RICHARD, LORD BISHOP OF OXFORD, 

ON THE TENDENCY TO ROMANISM 

Imputed to Doctrines held of old as now in the English Church. 

Second edition enlarged, in the press, 

SCRIPTURAL VIEWS OF HOLY BAPTISM, 

As established by the consent of the Ancient Church, and contrasted with 

the Systems of Modern Schools. 



Third edition, 8vo. 7s. 6d. 
THE DIVINE AUTHORITY OF HOLY SCRIPTURE 

Asserted from its adaptation to the real state of Human Nature, 
in Eight Sermons at Bampton s Lecture. 

BY JOHN MILLER, M.A. 

LATE FELLOW OF WORCESTER COLLEGE. 

8vo. 7s. 
THE DIVINE GLORY MANIFESTED 

IN THE CONDUCT AND DISCOURSES OF OUR LORD. 

Eight Sermons at Bampton s Lecture, 1836. 

BY C. A. OGILVIE, M.A. 

DOMESTIC CHAPLAIN TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, AND LATE 

FELLOW OF BALLIOL COLLEGE. 



8vo. 12s. 

THE PRINCIPAL OBJECTIONS AGAINST THE DOCTRINE 

OF THE TRINITY, 

And a portion of the Evidence on which that Doctrine is received 
by the Catholic Church, reviewed in Eight Sermons at 
Bampton s Lecture. 

BY T. S. L. VOGAN, M.A. 

OF ST. EDMUND HALL. 



8vo. 10s. 

THE 

AUTHORITATIVE TEACHING OF THE CHURCH 

SHEWN TO BE 

IN CONFORMITY WITH SCRIPTURE, ANALOGY, AND 
THE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 

EIGHT SERMONS AT BAMPTON S LECTURE, 1838. 

By HENRY ARTHUR WOODGATE, B.D. 

FELLOW OF ST. JOHN S COLLEGE, 
AND RECTOR OF EELLBROUGIITON, WORCESTERSHIRE. 

8vo. 12s. 

AN ANALYTICAL EXAMINATION 

Into the Character, Value, and just Application of the 

Writings of the 

CHRISTIAN FATHERS DURING THE ANTE-NICENE PERIOD. 
Being the BAMPTON LECTURES for 1839. 

BY W. D. CONY BE A RE, M.A. 

CHK1ST CHURCH. 



Second Edition, 8vo. 12s. 
LECTURES EXPLANATORY of the DIATESSARON, 

BY JOHN DAVID MACBRIDE, D.C.L. 

PRINCIPAL OF MAGDALENE HALL. 



8vo. 5s. 
THE DIATESSARON. 

In the words of the Authorized Version, with References to other 
parts of Scripture; and Various Readings from the most 
esteemed Paraphrases. 

8vo. 16s. 
ANALECTA HEBRAICA. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF HEBREW, 

With References to the most approved Grammars, and Tables of 
all the Regular and Irregular Verbs. 

BY C. W. H. PAULI. 



By the same Author, 

8vo. 4s. 
A KEY TO THE ANALECTA HEBRAICA. 

Second Edition, 8vo. 12s. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO HEBREW GRAMMAR. 
BY WILLIAM THOMAS PHILLIPS, B.D. 

FELLOW OF MAGDALEN COLLEGE, OXEORD 

2 vols. 12mo. 18s. 
THE BOOK OF PSALMS IN HEBREW, 

METRICALLY ARRANGED. 

With Selections from the various Readings of Kennicott and De 
Rossi, and from the Ancient Versions. 

BY J. ROGERS, M.A. 

CANON RESIDENTIARY OF EXETER CATHEDRAL, AND RECTOR OF MAWNAN. 

In the press, 2 vols. 8vo. 
A GRAMMAR OF THE GREEK LANGUAGE. 

Chiefly from the Text of RAPHAEL KUHNER. 

BY WILLIAM EDWARD JELF, M.A. 

STUDENT OF CHRIST CHURCH. 



The seventeenth edition, 3 2mo. 3s. 6d. 
The sixteenth edition^ 18iuo. 6s. 

THE CHRISTIAN YEAR. 

fa J7mt 



FOR THE SUNDAYS AND HOLYDAYS THROUGHOUT THE YEAH. 



12mo. 7s. 6d. 

THE* PSALTER, 

OR PSALMS OF DAVID; 

IN ENGLISH VERSE; 

Adapted, for the most part, to TUNES in COMMON USE; 
And dedicated, by Permission, 

TO THE 

LORD BISHOP OF OXFORD. 

Also in royal 32mo. Is. 6d. A cheap edition for distribution. 



The third edition, 18 mo. 3s. fid. 

Hgra ^postolfca. 

REPRINTED FROM THE BRITISH MAGAZINE. 



Second Edition, 10s. Gd. 



OR THE CATHOLIC AND APOSTOLIC CHURCH IN ENGLAND. 

Thoughts in Verse on Ecclesiastical subjects, selected and ar 
ranged so as to correspond with the different parts of a Gothic 
Cathedral. 

Illustrated by Engravings. 



Small 8vo. 7s. 6d. 
THOUGHTS IN PAST YEARS. 

BY THE AUTHOR OP THE CATHEDRAL. 



2 vols. 24mo. Cs. 
HYMNI EGOLESS, 

E BREVIARIIS 

PARISIENSI, ROMANO, SARISBURIENSI, EBORACENSI, 

ET ALIUNDE. 

" Some of the magnificent Hymns of the Romish Ritual, in which he had always 
delighted. We have often heard distinctly the cadence of the Dies Ira-; and 
1 think the very last stanza that we could make out was the first of a still greater 
favourite, Stabat Mater dolorosa," &c. &c. Lockhart s Life of Sir Walter Scott. 



I2mo. 4s. 

SERMONS 

ON THE MINISTRY AND ORDINANCES OF THE 

CHURCH OF ENGLAND. 

By the Right Rev. Father in God, WILLIAM BEVERIDGE, D.D. 

BISHOP OF ST. ASAPH. 



BY THE SAME AUTHOR, 

I2rao. 2s. Od. 

THE CHURCH CATECHISM EXPLAINED. 

For the use of the Diocese of St. Asaph. 



Fourth edition, 8vo. 12s. 
DISCOURSES ON PROPHECY, 

In which are considered its STRUCTURE, USE, and INSPIRATION. 

BY JOHN DAVISON, B.D. 

LATK FKLI.OW OF OK I El, COLLEOK. 



18mo. 4s. 

SACRA PRIVATA; 

PRIVATE MEDITATIONS, DEVOTIONS, AND PRAYERS. 

BY THOMAS WILSON, D.D. 

BISHOP OF SOUOR AND MAN. 

In this edition the work is reprinted entire, as published by the Author, for the 
use of the Clergy. All the editions published of late years are " accommodated 
to general use," by the omission of a larger portion of the work. 



18mo. 5s. 
A RATIONALE upon the BOOK of COMMON PRAYER. 

BY ANTH. SPARROW, D.D. 

SOMETIME LORD BISHOP OF NORWICH. 



18mo. 3s. 6d. 
ARCHBISHOP LAUD S DEVOTIONS. 

A NEW EDITION, WITH EXTRACTS FROM HIS DIARY. 

By the Rev. F. W. FABER, M.A. Fellow of University College. 

18mo. 5s. 
THE DIARY OF ARCHBISHOP LAUD. 

WITH EXTRACTS FROM HIS LETTERS. 

In the press, 18mo. 

THOMAS a KEMPIS ON THE IMITATION OF CHRIST. 

A new Translation. 

18mo. 5s. 

SELECTIONS from the WORKS of RICHARD HOOKER. 
BY THE REV. JOHN KEBLE, M.A. 

PROFESSOR OF POETRY, LATE FELLOW OF ORIEL COLLEGE. 



12nio. 5s. 
V1NCENTII L1RINENSTS COMMONITORIUM. 

Vincentius of Lirins Commonitory for the Antiquity and Univer 
sality of the Catholic Faith against the 

PROFANE NOVELTIES OF ALL HERETICS. 

WITH AN INTRODUCTION A ND A N APPENDIX. 



J 2mo. 3s. 

RATRAMNI SIVE BERTRAM! PRESBYTERI DE 
CORPORE ET SANGUINE DOMINI LIBER. 

The Book of Bertram the Priest on the Body and Blood of Christ. 

v 

To which is added, 

AN APPENDIX 

CONTAINING THE SAXON HOMILY OF AELFRIC. 

" It was written in the ninth century to oppose the doctrine of Transubstantiation, 
then first introduced. It has been condemned by the Council of Trent, and the 
principal Po&gt;rrmh writers; was substantially republished, under the shape of a 
Saxon Homily, by Archbishop Parker and fourteen other Bishops, to oppose the 
Romish doctiine; and was the book which converted Ridley, and through 
Ridley, Cranmer himself, from the Romish views of that Sacrament." Quarterly 
Review, March, 1839. 

12mo. 4s. (jd. 

APOLOGIA ECCLESLffi ANGL CAN^E. 

I.Iilic novae, editioni accedit epistola celeberrima ad virum nobilem 
D. Scipionem, patricium Venetum, de Concilio Tridentino con- 
scripta. 

AUCTORE JOANNE JUELLO, 

OLIM EPISCOPO SARISBURIENSI. 



In thd press, 12 mo. 

THE APOLOGY 

OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. 
BY JOHN JEWEL, D.D. 

SOMETIME BISHOP OF SALISBURY. 
BY THE SAM]: AUTHOR, 

In the press, 12 mo. 

TWO TREATISES. 

I. ON THE SCRIPTURES. II. ON THE SACRAMENTS. 



18mo. 3s. 6d. 
GODLY MEDITATIONS 

UPON the MOST HOLY SACRAMENT of the LORD S SUPPER. 
BY CHRISTOPHER SUTTON, D.D. 

WITH A PREFACE BY J. H. NEWMAN, B. D. 

FELLOW OF ORIEL COLLEGE. 
BY THE SAME AUTHOR, 

18mo. 3s. 6d. 
DISCE V1VERE. LEARNE TO LIVE. 

Anew edition, I8mo. 3s. 6d. 
DISCE MORI. LEARNE TO DYE. 

A new edition, 18mo. 3s. 6d. 
THE GOLDEN GROVE; A GUIDE TO DEVOTION. 

BY JEREMY TAYLOR, D.D. 

BISHOP OF DOWN AND CONNOR. 

18mo. 3s. 6d. 
HEART S EASE. 

OR A REMEDY AGAINST ALL TROU :S. 

With a Consolatory Discourse particularly directed to those who 
have lost their friends and dear relations. 

BY SIMON PATRICK, D.D. 

LATE LORD BISHOP OF ELY. 

Iii this edition the work is reprinted entire, as published by the 

Author. 

BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 

18mo. 3s. 6d. 
ADVICE TO A FRIEND. 

18mo. 3s. 6d. 

THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF BISHOP PATRICK. 

Nowjirst printed from the original Manuscript. 

[BAXTER, PRINTER, OXFORD. 



